matthew 1
1  The book of the history of Jesus Christ, son of David, son of Abraham:
2  Abraham became father to Isaac; Isaac became father to Jacob; Jacob became father to Judah and his brothers; 
3  Judah became father to Perez and to Zerah by Tamar; Perez became father to Hezron; Hezron became father to Ram; 
4  Ram became father to Amminadab; Amminadab became father to Nahshon; Nahshon became father to Salmon; 
5  Salmon became father to Boaz by Rahab; Boaz became father to Obed by Ruth; Obed became father to Jesse; 
6  Jesse became father to David the king. David became father to Solomon by the wife of Uriah; 
7  Solomon became father to Rehoboam; Rehoboam became father to Abijah; Abijah became father to Asa; 
8  Asa became father to Jehoshaphat; Jehoshaphat became father to Jehoram; Jehoram became father to Uzziah; 
9  Uzziah became father to Jotham; Jotham became father to Ahaz; Ahaz became father to Hezekiah; 
10  Hezekiah became father to Manasseh; Manasseh became father to Amon; Amon became father to Josiah; 
11  Josiah became father to Jeconiah and to his brothers at the time of the deportation to Babylon.
12  After the deportation to Babylon Jeconiah became father to Shealtiel; Shealtiel became father to Zerubbabel; 
13  Zerubbabel became father to Abiud; Abiud became father to Eliakim; Eliakim became father to Azor; 
14  Azor became father to Zadok; Zadok became father to Achim; Achim became father to Eliud; 
15  Eliud became father to Eleazar; Eleazar became father to Matthan; Matthan became father to Jacob; 
16  Jacob became father to Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom Jesus was born, who is called Christ.
17  All the generations, then, from Abraham until David were fourteen generations, and from David until the deportation to Babylon fourteen generations, and from the deportation to Babylon until the Christ fourteen generations.
18  But the birth of Jesus Christ was in this way. During the time his mother Mary was promised in marriage to Joseph, she was found to be pregnant by holy spirit before they were united.
19  However, Joseph her husband, because he was righteous and did not want to make her a public spectacle, intended to divorce her secretly.
20  But after he had thought these things over, look! Jehovah’s angel appeared to him in a dream, saying: “Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary your wife home, for that which has been begotten in her is by holy spirit.
21  She will give birth to a son, and you must call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.”
22  All this actually came about for that to be fulfilled which was spoken by Jehovah through his prophet, saying:
23  “Look! The virgin will become pregnant and will give birth to a son, and they will call his name Immanuel,” which means, when translated, “With Us Is God.”
24  Then Joseph woke up from his sleep and did as the angel of Jehovah had directed him, and he took his wife home.
25  But he had no intercourse with her until she gave birth to a son;  and he called his name Jesus.
matthew 2
2  After Jesus had been born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, look! astrologers from eastern parts came to Jerusalem,
2  saying: “Where is the one born king of the Jews? For we saw his star [when we were] in the east, and we have come to do him obeisance.”
3  At hearing this King Herod was agitated, and all Jerusalem along with him; 
4  and on gathering together all the chief priests and scribes of the people he began to inquire of them where the Christ was to be born.
5  They said to him: “In Bethlehem of Judea;  for this is how it has been written through the prophet,
6  ‘And you, O Bethlehem of the land of Judah, are by no means the most insignificant [city] among the governors of Judah;  for out of you will come forth a governing one, who will shepherd my people, Israel.’”
7  Then Herod secretly summoned the astrologers and carefully ascertained from them the time of the star’s appearing; 
8  and, when sending them to Bethlehem, he said: “Go make a careful search for the young child, and when YOU have found it report back to me, that I too may go and do it obeisance.”
9  When they had heard the king, they went their way;  and, look! the star they had seen [when they were] in the east went ahead of them, until it came to a stop above where the young child was.
10  On seeing the star they rejoiced very much indeed.
11  And when they went into the house they saw the young child with Mary its mother, and, falling down, they did obeisance to it. They also opened their treasures and presented it with gifts, gold and frankincense and myrrh.
12  However, because they were given divine warning in a dream not to return to Herod, they withdrew to their country by another way.
13  After they had withdrawn, look! Jehovah’s angel appeared in a dream to Joseph, saying: “Get up, take the young child and its mother and flee into Egypt, and stay there until I give you word;  for Herod is about to search for the young child to destroy it.”
14  So he got up and took along the young child and its mother by night and withdrew into Egypt,
15  and he stayed there until the decease of Herod, for that to be fulfilled which was spoken by Jehovah through his prophet, saying: “Out of Egypt I called my son.”
16  Then Herod, seeing he had been outwitted by the astrologers, fell into a great rage, and he sent out and had all the boys in Bethlehem and in all its districts done away with, from two years of age and under, according to the time that he had carefully ascertained from the astrologers.
17  Then that was fulfilled which was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet, saying:
18  “A voice was heard in Ramah, weeping and much wailing;  it was Rachel weeping for her children, and she was unwilling to take comfort, because they are no more.”
19  When Herod had deceased, look! Jehovah’s angel appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt
20  and said: “Get up, take the young child and its mother and be on your way into the land of Israel, for those who were seeking the soul of the young child are dead.”
21  So he got up and took the young child and its mother and entered into the land of Israel.
22  But hearing that Archelaus ruled as king of Judea instead of his father Herod, he became afraid to depart for there. Moreover, being given divine warning in a dream, he withdrew into the territory of Galilee,
23  and came and dwelt in a city named Nazareth, that there might be fulfilled what was spoken through the prophets: “He will be called a Nazarene.”
matthew 3
3  In those days John the Baptist came preaching in the wilderness of Judea,
2  saying: “REPENT, for the kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.”
3  This, in fact, is the one spoken of through Isaiah the prophet in these words: “Listen! Someone is crying out in the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way of Jehovah, YOU people! Make his roads straight.’”
4  But this very John had his clothing of camel’s hair and a leather girdle around his loins;  his food too was insect locusts and wild honey.
5  Then Jerusalem and all Judea and all the country around the Jordan made their way out to him,
6  and people were baptized by him in the Jordan River, openly confessing their sins.
7  When he caught sight of many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to the baptism, he said to them: “YOU offspring of vipers, who has intimated to YOU to flee from the coming wrath?
8  So then produce fruit that befits repentance; 
9  and do not presume to say to yourselves, ‘As a father we have Abraham.’ For I say to YOU that God is able to raise up children to Abraham from these stones.
10  Already the ax is lying at the root of the trees;  every tree, then, that does not produce fine fruit is to be cut down and thrown into the fire.
11  I, for my part, baptize YOU with water because of YOUR repentance;  but the one coming after me is stronger than I am, whose sandals I am not fit to take off. That one will baptize YOU people with holy spirit and with fire.
12  His winnowing shovel is in his hand, and he will completely clean up his threshing floor, and will gather his wheat into the storehouse, but the chaff he will burn up with fire that cannot be put out.”
13  Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to John, in order to be baptized by him.
14  But the latter tried to prevent him, saying: “I am the one needing to be baptized by you, and are you coming to me?”
15  In reply Jesus said to him: “Let it be, this time, for in that way it is suitable for us to carry out all that is righteous.” Then he quit preventing him.
16  After being baptized Jesus immediately came up from the water;  and, look! the heavens were opened up, and he saw descending like a dove God’s spirit coming upon him.
17  Look! Also, there was a voice from the heavens that said: “This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved.”
matthew 4
4  Then Jesus was led by the spirit up into the wilderness to be tempted by the Devil.
2  After he had fasted forty days and forty nights, then he felt hungry.
3  Also, the Tempter came and said to him: “If you are a son of God, tell these stones to become loaves of bread.”
4  But in reply he said: “It is written, ‘Man must live, not on bread alone, but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth.’”
5  Then the Devil took him along into the holy city, and he stationed him upon the battlement of the temple
6  and said to him: “If you are a son of God, hurl yourself down;  for it is written, ‘He will give his angels a charge concerning you, and they will carry you on their hands, that you may at no time strike your foot against a stone.’”
7  Jesus said to him: “Again it is written, ‘You must not put Jehovah your God to the test.’”
8  Again the Devil took him along to an unusually high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory,
9  and he said to him: “All these things I will give you if you fall down and do an act of worship to me.”
10  Then Jesus said to him: “Go away, Satan! For it is written, ‘It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.’”
11  Then the Devil left him, and, look! angels came and began to minister to him.
12  Now when he heard that John had been arrested, he withdrew into Galilee.
13  Further, after leaving Nazareth, he came and took up residence in Capernaum beside the sea in the districts of Zebulun and Naphtali,
14  that there might be fulfilled what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying:
15  “O land of Zebulun and land of Naphtali, along the road of the sea, on the other side of the Jordan, Galilee of the nations!
16  the people sitting in darkness saw a great light, and as for those sitting in a region of deathly shadow, light rose upon them.”
17  From that time on Jesus commenced preaching and saying: “Repent, YOU people, for the kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.”
18  Walking alongside the sea of Galilee he saw two brothers, Simon who is called Peter and Andrew his brother, letting down a fishing net into the sea, for they were fishers.
19  And he said to them: “Come after me, and I will make YOU fishers of men.”
20  At once abandoning the nets, they followed him.
21  Going on also from there he saw two others [who were] brothers, James [the son] of Zebedee and John his brother, in the boat with Zebedee their father, mending their nets, and he called them.
22  At once leaving the boat and their father, they followed him.
23  Then he went around throughout the whole of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues and preaching the good news of the kingdom and curing every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity among the people.
24  And the report about him went out into all Syria;  and they brought him all those faring badly, distressed with various diseases and torments, demon-possessed and epileptic and paralyzed persons, and he cured them.
25  Consequently great crowds followed him from Galilee and Decapolis and Jerusalem and Judea and from the other side of the Jordan.
matthew 5
5  When he saw the crowds he went up into the mountain;  and after he sat down his disciples came to him; 
2  and he opened his mouth and began teaching them, saying:
3  “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need, since the kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.
4  “Happy are those who mourn, since they will be comforted.
5  “Happy are the mild-tempered ones, since they will inherit the earth.
6  “Happy are those hungering and thirsting for righteousness, since they will be filled.
7  “Happy are the merciful, since they will be shown mercy.
8  “Happy are the pure in heart, since they will see God.
9  “Happy are the peaceable, since they will be called ‘sons of God.’
10  “Happy are those who have been persecuted for righteousness’ sake, since the kingdom of the heavens belongs to them.
11  “Happy are YOU when people reproach YOU and persecute YOU and lyingly say every sort of wicked thing against YOU for my sake.
12  Rejoice and leap for joy, since YOUR reward is great in the heavens;  for in that way they persecuted the prophets prior to YOU.
13  “YOU are the salt of the earth;  but if the salt loses its strength, how will its saltness be restored? It is no longer usable for anything but to be thrown outside to be trampled on by men.
14  “YOU are the light of the world. A city cannot be hid when situated upon a mountain.
15  People light a lamp and set it, not under the measuring basket, but upon the lampstand, and it shines upon all those in the house.
16  Likewise let YOUR light shine before men, that they may see YOUR fine works and give glory to YOUR Father who is in the heavens.
17  “Do not think I came to destroy the Law or the Prophets. I came, not to destroy, but to fulfill; 
18  for truly I say to YOU that sooner would heaven and earth pass away than for one smallest letter or one particle of a letter to pass away from the Law by any means and not all things take place.
19  Whoever, therefore, breaks one of these least commandments and teaches mankind to that effect, he will be called ‘least’ in relation to the kingdom of the heavens. As for anyone who does them and teaches them, this one will be called ‘great’ in relation to the kingdom of the heavens.
20  For I say to YOU that if YOUR righteousness does not abound more than that of the scribes and Pharisees, YOU will by no means enter into the kingdom of the heavens.
21  “YOU heard that it was said to those of ancient times, ‘You must not murder;  but whoever commits a murder will be accountable to the court of justice.’
22  However, I say to YOU that everyone who continues wrathful with his brother will be accountable to the court of justice;  but whoever addresses his brother with an unspeakable word of contempt will be accountable to the Supreme Court;  whereas whoever says, ‘You despicable fool!’ will be liable to the fiery Gehenna.
23  “If, then, you are bringing your gift to the altar and you there remember that your brother has something against you,
24  leave your gift there in front of the altar, and go away;  first make your peace with your brother, and then, when you have come back, offer up your gift.
25  “Be about settling matters quickly with the one complaining against you at law, while you are with him on the way there, that somehow the complainant may not turn you over to the judge, and the judge to the court attendant, and you get thrown into prison.
26  I say to you for a fact, You will certainly not come out from there until you have paid over the last coin of very little value.
27  “YOU heard that it was said, ‘You must not commit adultery.’
28  But I say to YOU that everyone that keeps on looking at a woman so as to have a passion for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
29  If, now, that right eye of yours is making you stumble, tear it out and throw it away from you. For it is more beneficial to you for one of your members to be lost to you than for your whole body to be pitched into Gehenna.
30  Also, if your right hand is making you stumble, cut it off and throw it away from you. For it is more beneficial to you for one of your members to be lost than for your whole body to land in Gehenna.
31  “Moreover it was said, ‘Whoever divorces his wife, let him give her a certificate of divorce.’
32  However, I say to YOU that everyone divorcing his wife, except on account of fornication, makes her a subject for adultery, and whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
33  “Again YOU heard that it was said to those of ancient times, ‘You must not swear without performing, but you must pay your vows to Jehovah.’
34  However, I say to YOU: Do not swear at all, neither by heaven, because it is God’s throne; 
35  nor by earth, because it is the footstool of his feet;  nor by Jerusalem, because it is the city of the great King.
36  Nor by your head must you swear, because you cannot turn one hair white or black.
37  Just let YOUR word Yes mean Yes, YOUR No, No;  for what is in excess of these is from the wicked one.
38  “YOU heard that it was said, ‘Eye for eye and tooth for tooth.’
39  However, I say to YOU: Do not resist him that is wicked;  but whoever slaps you on your right cheek, turn the other also to him.
40  And if a person wants to go to court with you and get possession of your inner garment, let your outer garment also go to him; 
41  and if someone under authority impresses you into service for a mile, go with him two miles.
42  Give to the one asking you, and do not turn away from one that wants to borrow from you [without interest].
43  “YOU heard that it was said, ‘You must love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’
44  However, I say to YOU: Continue to love YOUR enemies and to pray for those persecuting YOU; 
45  that YOU may prove yourselves sons of YOUR Father who is in the heavens, since he makes his sun rise upon wicked people and good and makes it rain upon righteous people and unrighteous.
46  For if YOU love those loving YOU, what reward do YOU have? Are not also the tax collectors doing the same thing?
47  And if YOU greet YOUR brothers only, what extraordinary thing are YOU doing? Are not also the people of the nations doing the same thing?
48  YOU must accordingly be perfect, as YOUR heavenly Father is perfect.
matthew 6
6  “Take good care not to practice YOUR righteousness in front of men in order to be observed by them;  otherwise YOU will have no reward with YOUR Father who is in the heavens.
2  Hence when you go making gifts of mercy, do not blow a trumpet ahead of you, just as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may be glorified by men. Truly I say to YOU, They are having their reward in full.
3  But you, when making gifts of mercy, do not let your left hand know what your right is doing,
4  that your gifts of mercy may be in secret;  then your Father who is looking on in secret will repay you.
5  “Also, when YOU pray, YOU must not be as the hypocrites;  because they like to pray standing in the synagogues and on the corners of the broad ways to be visible to men. Truly I say to YOU, They are having their reward in full.
6  You, however, when you pray, go into your private room and, after shutting your door, pray to your Father who is in secret;  then your Father who looks on in secret will repay you.
7  But when praying, do not say the same things over and over again, just as the people of the nations do, for they imagine they will get a hearing for their use of many words.
8  So, do not make yourselves like them, for God YOUR Father knows what things YOU are needing before ever YOU ask him.
9  “YOU must pray, then, this way: “‘Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified.
10  Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.
11  Give us today our bread for this day; 
12  and forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.
13  And do not bring us into temptation, but deliver us from the wicked one.’
14  “For if YOU forgive men their trespasses, YOUR heavenly Father will also forgive YOU; 
15  whereas if YOU do not forgive men their trespasses, neither will YOUR Father forgive YOUR trespasses.
16  “When YOU are fasting, stop becoming sad-faced like the hypocrites, for they disfigure their faces that they may appear to men to be fasting. Truly I say to YOU, They are having their reward in full.
17  But you, when fasting, grease your head and wash your face,
18  that you may appear to be fasting, not to men, but to your Father who is in secrecy;  then your Father who is looking on in secrecy will repay you.
19  “Stop storing up for yourselves treasures upon the earth, where moth and rust consume, and where thieves break in and steal.
20  Rather, store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust consumes, and where thieves do not break in and steal.
21  For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
22  “The lamp of the body is the eye. If, then, your eye is simple, your whole body will be bright; 
23  but if your eye is wicked, your whole body will be dark. If in reality the light that is in you is darkness, how great that darkness is!
24  “No one can slave for two masters;  for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will stick to the one and despise the other. YOU cannot slave for God and for Riches.
25  “On this account I say to YOU: Stop being anxious about YOUR souls as to what YOU will eat or what YOU will drink, or about YOUR bodies as to what YOU will wear. Does not the soul mean more than food and the body than clothing?
26  Observe intently the birds of heaven, because they do not sow seed or reap or gather into storehouses;  still YOUR heavenly Father feeds them. Are YOU not worth more than they are?
27  Who of YOU by being anxious can add one cubit to his life span?
28  Also, on the matter of clothing, why are YOU anxious? Take a lesson from the lilies of the field, how they are growing;  they do not toil, nor do they spin; 
29  but I say to YOU that not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these.
30  If, now, God thus clothes the vegetation of the field, which is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, will he not much rather clothe YOU, YOU with little faith?
31  So never be anxious and say, ‘What are we to eat?’ or, ‘What are we to drink?’ or, ‘What are we to put on?’
32  For all these are the things the nations are eagerly pursuing. For YOUR heavenly Father knows YOU need all these things.
33  “Keep on, then, seeking first the kingdom and his righteousness, and all these [other] things will be added to YOU.
34  So, never be anxious about the next day, for the next day will have its own anxieties. Sufficient for each day is its own badness.
matthew 7
7  “Stop judging that YOU may not be judged; 
2  for with what judgment YOU are judging, YOU will be judged;  and with the measure that YOU are measuring out, they will measure out to YOU.
3  Why, then, do you look at the straw in your brother’s eye, but do not consider the rafter in your own eye?
4  Or how can you say to your brother, ‘Allow me to extract the straw from your eye’;  when, look! a rafter is in your own eye?
5  Hypocrite! First extract the rafter from your own eye, and then you will see clearly how to extract the straw from your brother’s eye.
6  “Do not give what is holy to dogs, neither throw YOUR pearls before swine, that they may never trample them under their feet and turn around and rip YOU open.
7  “Keep on asking, and it will be given YOU;  keep on seeking, and YOU will find;  keep on knocking, and it will be opened to YOU.
8  For everyone asking receives, and everyone seeking finds, and to everyone knocking it will be opened.
9  Indeed, who is the man among YOU whom his son asks for bread—he will not hand him a stone, will he?
10  Or, perhaps, he will ask for a fish—he will not hand him a serpent, will he?
11  Therefore, if YOU, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to YOUR children, how much more so will YOUR Father who is in the heavens give good things to those asking him?
12  “All things, therefore, that YOU want men to do to YOU, YOU also must likewise do to them;  this, in fact, is what the Law and the Prophets mean.
13  “Go in through the narrow gate;  because broad and spacious is the road leading off into destruction, and many are the ones going in through it; 
14  whereas narrow is the gate and cramped the road leading off into life, and few are the ones finding it.
15  “Be on the watch for the false prophets that come to YOU in sheep’s covering, but inside they are ravenous wolves.
16  By their fruits YOU will recognize them. Never do people gather grapes from thorns or figs from thistles, do they?
17  Likewise every good tree produces fine fruit, but every rotten tree produces worthless fruit; 
18  a good tree cannot bear worthless fruit, neither can a rotten tree produce fine fruit.
19  Every tree not producing fine fruit gets cut down and thrown into the fire.
20  Really, then, by their fruits YOU will recognize those [men].
21  “Not everyone saying to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter into the kingdom of the heavens, but the one doing the will of my Father who is in the heavens will.
22  Many will say to me in that day, ‘Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name, and expel demons in your name, and perform many powerful works in your name?’
23  And yet then I will confess to them: I never knew YOU! Get away from me, YOU workers of lawlessness.
24  “Therefore everyone that hears these sayings of mine and does them will be likened to a discreet man, who built his house upon the rock-mass.
25  And the rain poured down and the floods came and the winds blew and lashed against that house, but it did not cave in, for it had been founded upon the rock-mass.
26  Furthermore, everyone hearing these sayings of mine and not doing them will be likened to a foolish man, who built his house upon the sand.
27  And the rain poured down and the floods came and the winds blew and struck against that house and it caved in, and its collapse was great.”
28  Now when Jesus finished these sayings, the effect was that the crowds were astounded at his way of teaching; 
29  for he was teaching them as a person having authority, and not as their scribes.
matthew 8
8  After he had come down from the mountain great crowds followed him.
2  And, look! a leprous man came up and began doing obeisance to him, saying: “Lord, if you just want to, you can make me clean.”
3  And so, stretching out [his] hand, he touched him, saying: “I want to. Be made clean.” And immediately his leprosy was cleansed away.
4  Then Jesus said to him: “See that you tell no one, but go, show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses appointed, for the purpose of a witness to them.”
5  When he entered into Capernaum, an army officer came to him, entreating him
6  and saying: “Sir, my manservant is laid up in the house with paralysis, being terribly tormented.”
7  He said to him: “When I get there I will cure him.”
8  In reply the army officer said: “Sir, I am not a fit man for you to enter under my roof, but just say the word and my manservant will be healed.
9  For I too am a man placed under authority, having soldiers under me, and I say to this one, ‘Be on your way!’ and he is on his way, and to another, ‘Come!’ and he comes, and to my slave, ‘Do this!’ and he does it.”
10  Hearing that, Jesus became amazed and said to those following him: “I tell YOU the truth, With no one in Israel have I found so great a faith.
11  But I tell YOU that many from eastern parts and western parts will come and recline at the table with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of the heavens; 
12  whereas the sons of the kingdom will be thrown into the darkness outside. There is where [their] weeping and the gnashing of [their] teeth will be.”
13  Then Jesus said to the army officer: “Go. Just as it has been your faith, so let it come to pass for you.” And the manservant was healed in that hour.
14  And Jesus, on coming into Peter’s house, saw his mother-in-law lying down and sick with fever.
15  So he touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she got up and began ministering to him.
16  But after it became evening, people brought him many demon-possessed persons;  and he expelled the spirits with a word, and he cured all who were faring badly; 
17  that there might be fulfilled what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying: “He himself took our sicknesses and carried our diseases.”
18  When Jesus saw a crowd around him, he gave the command to shove off for the other side.
19  And a certain scribe came up and said to him: “Teacher, I will follow you wherever you are about to go.”
20  But Jesus said to him: “Foxes have dens and birds of heaven have roosts, but the Son of man has nowhere to lay down his head.”
21  Then another of the disciples said to him: “Lord, permit me first to leave and bury my father.”
22  Jesus said to him: “Keep following me, and let the dead bury their dead.”
23  And when he got aboard a boat, his disciples followed him.
24  Now, look! a great agitation arose in the sea, so that the boat was being covered by the waves;  he, however, was sleeping.
25  And they came and woke him up, saying: “Lord, save us, we are about to perish!”
26  But he said to them: “Why are YOU fainthearted, YOU with little faith?” Then, getting up, he rebuked the winds and the sea, and a great calm set in.
27  So the men became amazed and said: “What sort of person is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him?”
28  When he got to the other side, into the country of the Gadarenes, there met him two demon-possessed men coming out from among the memorial tombs, unusually fierce, so that nobody had the courage to pass by on that road.
29  And, look! they screamed, saying: “What have we to do with you, Son of God? Did you come here to torment us before the appointed time?”
30  But a long way off from them a herd of many swine was at pasture.
31  So the demons began to entreat him, saying: “If you expel us, send us forth into the herd of swine.”
32  Accordingly he said to them: “Go!” They came out and went off into the swine;  and, look! the entire herd rushed over the precipice into the sea and died in the waters.
33  But the herders fled and, going into the city, they reported everything, including the affair of the demon-possessed men.
34  And, look! all the city turned out to meet Jesus;  and after having seen him, they earnestly urged him to move out from their districts.
matthew 9
9  So, boarding the boat, he proceeded across and went into his own city.
2  And, look! they were bringing him a paralyzed man lying on a bed. On seeing their faith Jesus said to the paralytic: “Take courage, child;  your sins are forgiven.”
3  And, look! certain of the scribes said to themselves: “This fellow is blaspheming.”
4  And Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said: “Why are YOU thinking wicked things in YOUR hearts?
5  For instance, which is easier, to say, Your sins are forgiven, or to say, Get up and walk?
6  However, in order for YOU to know that the Son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins—” then he said to the paralytic: “Get up, pick up your bed, and go to your home.”
7  And he got up and went off to his home.
8  At the sight of this the crowds were struck with fear, and they glorified God, who gave such authority to men.
9  Next, while passing along from there, Jesus caught sight of a man named Matthew seated at the tax office, and he said to him: “Be my follower.” Thereupon he did rise up and follow him.
10  Later, while he was reclining at the table in the house, look! many tax collectors and sinners came and began reclining with Jesus and his disciples.
11  But on seeing this the Pharisees began to say to his disciples: “Why is it that YOUR teacher eats with tax collectors and sinners?”
12  Hearing [them], he said: “Persons in health do not need a physician, but the ailing do.
13  Go, then, and learn what this means, ‘I want mercy, and not sacrifice.’ For I came to call, not righteous people, but sinners.”
14  Then John’s disciples came to him and asked: “Why is it that we and the Pharisees practice fasting but your disciples do not fast?”
15  At this Jesus said to them: “The friends of the bridegroom have no reason to mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them, do they? But days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast.
16  Nobody sews a patch of unshrunk cloth upon an old outer garment;  for its full strength would pull from the outer garment and the tear would become worse.
17  Neither do people put new wine into old wineskins;  but if they do, then the wineskins burst and the wine spills out and the wineskins are ruined. But people put new wine into new wineskins, and both things are preserved.”
18  While he was telling them these things, look! a certain ruler who had approached began to do obeisance to him, saying: “By now my daughter must be dead;  but come and lay your hand upon her and she will come to life.”
19  Then Jesus, getting up, began to follow him;  also his disciples did.
20  And, look! a woman suffering twelve years from a flow of blood came up behind and touched the fringe of his outer garment; 
21  for she kept saying to herself: “If I only touch his outer garment I shall get well.”
22  Jesus turned around and, noticing her, said: “Take courage, daughter;  your faith has made you well.” And from that hour the woman became well.
23  When, now, he came into the ruler’s house and caught sight of the flute players and the crowd in noisy confusion,
24  Jesus began to say: “Leave the place, for the little girl did not die, but she is sleeping.” At this they began to laugh at him scornfully.
25  As soon as the crowd had been sent outside, he went in and took hold of her hand, and the little girl got up.
26  Of course, the talk about this spread out into all that region.
27  As Jesus was passing along from there, two blind men followed him, crying out and saying: “Have mercy on us, Son of David.”
28  After he had gone into the house, the blind men came to him, and Jesus asked them: “Do YOU have faith that I can do this?” They answered him: “Yes, Lord.”
29  Then he touched their eyes, saying: “According to YOUR faith let it happen to YOU.”
30  And their eyes received sight. Moreover, Jesus sternly charged them, saying: “See that nobody gets to know it.”
31  But they, after getting outside, made it public about him in all that region.
32  Now when they were leaving, look! people brought him a dumb man possessed of a demon; 
33  and after the demon had been expelled the dumb man spoke. Well, the crowds felt amazement and said: “Never was anything like this seen in Israel.”
34  But the Pharisees began to say: “It is by the ruler of the demons that he expels the demons.”
35  And Jesus set out on a tour of all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues and preaching the good news of the kingdom and curing every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity.
36  On seeing the crowds he felt pity for them, because they were skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd.
37  Then he said to his disciples: “Yes, the harvest is great, but the workers are few.
38  Therefore, beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.”
matthew 10
10  So he summoned his twelve disciples and gave them authority over unclean spirits, in order to expel these and to cure every sort of disease and every sort of infirmity.
2  The names of the twelve apostles are these: First, Simon, the one called Peter, and Andrew his brother;  and James the [son] of Zebedee and John his brother; 
3  Philip and Bartholomew;  Thomas and Matthew the tax collector;  James the [son] of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus; 
4  Simon the Cananaean, and Judas Iscariot, who later betrayed him.
5  These twelve Jesus sent forth, giving them these orders: “Do not go off into the road of the nations, and do not enter into a Samaritan city; 
6  but, instead, go continually to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
7  As YOU go, preach, saying, ‘The kingdom of the heavens has drawn near.’
8  Cure sick people, raise up dead persons, make lepers clean, expel demons. YOU received free, give free.
9  Do not procure gold or silver or copper for YOUR girdle purses,
10  or a food pouch for the trip, or two undergarments, or sandals or a staff;  for the worker deserves his food.
11  “Into whatever city or village YOU enter, search out who in it is deserving, and stay there until YOU leave.
12  When YOU are entering into the house, greet the household; 
13  and if the house is deserving, let the peace YOU wish it come upon it;  but if it is not deserving, let the peace from YOU return upon YOU.
14  Wherever anyone does not take YOU in or listen to YOUR words, on going out of that house or that city shake the dust off YOUR feet.
15  Truly I say to YOU, It will be more endurable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah on Judgment Day than for that city.
16  “Look! I am sending YOU forth as sheep amidst wolves;  therefore prove yourselves cautious as serpents and yet innocent as doves.
17  Be on YOUR guard against men;  for they will deliver YOU up to local courts, and they will scourge YOU in their synagogues.
18  Why, YOU will be haled before governors and kings for my sake, for a witness to them and the nations.
19  However, when they deliver YOU up, do not become anxious about how or what YOU are to speak;  for what YOU are to speak will be given YOU in that hour; 
20  for the ones speaking are not just YOU, but it is the spirit of YOUR Father that speaks by YOU.
21  Further, brother will deliver up brother to death, and a father his child, and children will rise up against parents and will have them put to death.
22  And YOU will be objects of hatred by all people on account of my name;  but he that has endured to the end is the one that will be saved.
23  When they persecute YOU in one city, flee to another;  for truly I say to YOU, YOU will by no means complete the circuit of the cities of Israel until the Son of man arrives.
24  “A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a slave above his lord.
25  It is enough for the disciple to become as his teacher, and the slave as his lord. If people have called the householder Beelzebub, how much more [will they call] those of his household so?
26  Therefore do not fear them;  for there is nothing covered over that will not become uncovered, and secret that will not become known.
27  What I tell YOU in the darkness, say in the light;  and what YOU hear whispered, preach from the housetops.
28  And do not become fearful of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul;  but rather be in fear of him that can destroy both soul and body in Gehenna.
29  Do not two sparrows sell for a coin of small value? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground without YOUR Father’s [knowledge].
30  But the very hairs of YOUR head are all numbered.
31  Therefore have no fear: YOU are worth more than many sparrows.
32  “Everyone, then, that confesses union with me before men, I will also confess union with him before my Father who is in the heavens; 
33  but whoever disowns me before men, I will also disown him before my Father who is in the heavens.
34  Do not think I came to put peace upon the earth;  I came to put, not peace, but a sword.
35  For I came to cause division, with a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a young wife against her mother-in-law.
36  Indeed, a man’s enemies will be persons of his own household.
37  He that has greater affection for father or mother than for me is not worthy of me;  and he that has greater affection for son or daughter than for me is not worthy of me.
38  And whoever does not accept his torture stake and follow after me is not worthy of me.
39  He that finds his soul will lose it, and he that loses his soul for my sake will find it.
40  “He that receives YOU receives me also, and he that receives me receives him also that sent me forth.
41  He that receives a prophet because he is a prophet will get a prophet’s reward, and he that receives a righteous man because he is a righteous man will get a righteous man’s reward.
42  And whoever gives one of these little ones only a cup of cold water to drink because he is a disciple, I tell YOU truly, he will by no means lose his reward.”
matthew 11
11  Now when Jesus had finished giving instructions to his twelve disciples, he set out from there to teach and preach in their cities.
2  But John, having heard in jail about the works of the Christ, sent by means of his own disciples
3  and said to him: “Are you the Coming One, or are we to expect a different one?”
4  In reply Jesus said to them: “Go YOUR way and report to John what YOU are hearing and seeing:
5  The blind are seeing again, and the lame are walking about, the lepers are being cleansed and the deaf are hearing, and the dead are being raised up, and the poor are having the good news declared to them; 
6  and happy is he that finds no cause for stumbling in me.”
7  While these were on their way, Jesus started to say to the crowds respecting John: “What did YOU go out into the wilderness to behold? A reed being tossed by a wind?
8  What, then, did YOU go out to see? A man dressed in soft garments? Why, those wearing soft garments are in the houses of kings.
9  Really, then, why did YOU go out? To see a prophet? Yes, I tell YOU, and far more than a prophet.
10  This is he concerning whom it is written, ‘Look! I myself am sending forth my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way ahead of you!’
11  Truly I say to YOU people, Among those born of women there has not been raised up a greater than John the Baptist;  but a person that is a lesser one in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than he is.
12  But from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of the heavens is the goal toward which men press, and those pressing forward are seizing it.
13  For all, the Prophets and the Law, prophesied until John; 
14  and if YOU want to accept it, He himself is ‘Elijah who is destined to come.’
15  Let him that has ears listen.
16  “With whom shall I compare this generation? It is like young children sitting in the marketplaces who cry out to their playmates,
17  saying, ‘We played the flute for YOU, but YOU did not dance;  we wailed, but YOU did not beat yourselves in grief.’
18  Correspondingly, John came neither eating nor drinking, yet people say, ‘He has a demon’; 
19  the Son of man did come eating and drinking, still people say, ‘Look! A man gluttonous and given to drinking wine, a friend of tax collectors and sinners.’ All the same, wisdom is proved righteous by its works.”
20  Then he started to reproach the cities in which most of his powerful works had taken place, because they did not repent:
21  “Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! because if the powerful works had taken place in Tyre and Sidon that took place in YOU, they would long ago have repented in sackcloth and ashes.
22  Consequently I say to YOU, It will be more endurable for Tyre and Sidon on Judgment Day than for YOU.
23  And you, Capernaum, will you perhaps be exalted to heaven? Down to Hades you will come;  because if the powerful works that took place in you had taken place in Sodom, it would have remained until this very day.
24  Consequently I say to YOU people, It will be more endurable for the land of Sodom on Judgment Day than for you.”
25  At that time Jesus said in response: “I publicly praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and intellectual ones and have revealed them to babes.
26  Yes, O Father, because to do thus came to be the way approved by you.
27  All things have been delivered to me by my Father, and no one fully knows the Son but the Father, neither does anyone fully know the Father but the Son and anyone to whom the Son is willing to reveal him.
28  Come to me, all YOU who are toiling and loaded down, and I will refresh YOU.
29  Take my yoke upon YOU and learn from me, for I am mild-tempered and lowly in heart, and YOU will find refreshment for YOUR souls.
30  For my yoke is kindly and my load is light.”
matthew 12
12  At that season Jesus went through the grainfields on the sabbath. His disciples got hungry and started to pluck heads of grain and to eat.
2  At seeing this the Pharisees said to him: “Look! Your disciples are doing what it is not lawful to do on the sabbath.”
3  He said to them: “Have YOU not read what David did when he and the men with him got hungry?
4  How he entered into the house of God and they ate the loaves of presentation, something that it was not lawful for him to eat, nor for those with him, but for the priests only?
5  Or, have YOU not read in the Law that on the sabbaths the priests in the temple treat the sabbath as not sacred and continue guiltless?
6  But I tell YOU that something greater than the temple is here.
7  However, if YOU had understood what this means, ‘I want mercy, and not sacrifice,’ YOU would not have condemned the guiltless ones.
8  For Lord of the sabbath is what the Son of man is.”
9  After departing from that place he went into their synagogue; 
10  and, look! a man with a withered hand! So they asked him, “Is it lawful to cure on the sabbath?” that they might get an accusation against him.
11  He said to them: “Who will be the man among YOU that has one sheep and, if this falls into a pit on the sabbath, will not get hold of it and lift it out?
12  All considered, of how much more worth is a man than a sheep! So it is lawful to do a fine thing on the sabbath.”
13  Then he said to the man: “Stretch out your hand.” And he stretched it out, and it was restored sound like the other hand.
14  But the Pharisees went out and took counsel against him that they might destroy him.
15  Having come to know [this], Jesus withdrew from there. Many also followed him, and he cured them all,
16  but he strictly charged them not to make him manifest; 
17  that there might be fulfilled what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, who said:
18  “Look! My servant whom I chose, my beloved, whom my soul approved! I will put my spirit upon him, and what justice is he will make clear to the nations.
19  He will not wrangle, nor cry aloud, nor will anyone hear his voice in the broad ways.
20  No bruised reed will he crush, and no smoldering flaxen wick will he extinguish, until he sends out justice with success.
21  Indeed, in his name nations will hope.”
22  Then they brought him a demon-possessed man, blind and dumb;  and he cured him, so that the dumb man spoke and saw.
23  Well, all the crowds were simply carried away and began to say: “May this not perhaps be the Son of David?”
24  At hearing this, the Pharisees said: “This fellow does not expel the demons except by means of Beelzebub, the ruler of the demons.”
25  Knowing their thoughts, he said to them: “Every kingdom divided against itself comes to desolation, and every city or house divided against itself will not stand.
26  In the same way, if Satan expels Satan, he has become divided against himself;  how, then, will his kingdom stand?
27  Moreover, if I expel the demons by means of Beelzebub, by means of whom do YOUR sons expel them? This is why they will be judges of YOU.
28  But if it is by means of God’s spirit that I expel the demons, the kingdom of God has really overtaken YOU.
29  Or how can anyone invade the house of a strong man and seize his movable goods, unless first he binds the strong man? And then he will plunder his house.
30  He that is not on my side is against me, and he that does not gather with me scatters.
31  “On this account I say to YOU, Every sort of sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men, but the blasphemy against the spirit will not be forgiven.
32  For example, whoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven him;  but whoever speaks against the holy spirit, it will not be forgiven him, no, not in this system of things nor in that to come.
33  “Either YOU people make the tree fine and its fruit fine or make the tree rotten and its fruit rotten;  for by its fruit the tree is known.
34  Offspring of vipers, how can YOU speak good things, when YOU are wicked? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
35  The good man out of his good treasure sends out good things, whereas the wicked man out of his wicked treasure sends out wicked things.
36  I tell YOU that every unprofitable saying that men speak, they will render an account concerning it on Judgment Day; 
37  for by your words you will be declared righteous, and by your words you will be condemned.”
38  Then as an answer to him some of the scribes and Pharisees said: “Teacher, we want to see a sign from you.”
39  In reply he said to them: “A wicked and adulterous generation keeps on seeking for a sign, but no sign will be given it except the sign of Jonah the prophet.
40  For just as Jonah was in the belly of the huge fish three days and three nights, so the Son of man will be in the heart of the earth three days and three nights.
41  Men of Nineveh will rise up in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it;  because they repented at what Jonah preached, but, look! something more than Jonah is here.
42  The queen of the south will be raised up in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it;  because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, but, look! something more than Solomon is here.
43  “When an unclean spirit comes out of a man, it passes through parched places in search of a resting-place, and finds none.
44  Then it says, ‘I will go back to my house out of which I moved’;  and on arriving it finds it unoccupied but swept clean and adorned.
45  Then it goes its way and takes along with it seven different spirits more wicked than itself, and, after getting inside, they dwell there;  and the final circumstances of that man become worse than the first. That is how it will be also with this wicked generation.”
46  While he was yet speaking to the crowds, look! his mother and brothers took up a position outside seeking to speak to him.
47  So someone said to him: “Look! Your mother and your brothers are standing outside, seeking to speak to you.”
48  As an answer he said to the one telling him: “Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?”
49  And extending his hand toward his disciples, he said: “Look! My mother and my brothers!
50  For whoever does the will of my Father who is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.”
matthew 13
13  On that day Jesus, having left the house, was sitting by the sea; 
2  and great crowds gathered to him, so that he went aboard a boat and sat down, and all the crowd was standing on the beach.
3  Then he told them many things by illustrations, saying: “Look! A sower went out to sow; 
4  and as he was sowing, some [seeds] fell alongside the road, and the birds came and ate them up.
5  Others fell upon the rocky places where they did not have much soil, and at once they sprang up because of not having depth of soil.
6  But when the sun rose they were scorched, and because of not having root they withered.
7  Others, too, fell among the thorns, and the thorns came up and choked them.
8  Still others fell upon the fine soil and they began to yield fruit, this one a hundredfold, that one sixty, the other thirty.
9  Let him that has ears listen.”
10  So the disciples came up and said to him: “Why is it you speak to them by the use of illustrations?”
11  In reply he said: “To YOU it is granted to understand the sacred secrets of the kingdom of the heavens, but to those people it is not granted.
12  For whoever has, more will be given him and he will be made to abound;  but whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken from him.
13  This is why I speak to them by the use of illustrations, because, looking, they look in vain, and hearing, they hear in vain, neither do they get the sense of it; 
14  and toward them the prophecy of Isaiah is having fulfillment, which says, ‘By hearing, YOU will hear but by no means get the sense of it;  and, looking, YOU will look but by no means see.
15  For the heart of this people has grown unreceptive, and with their ears they have heard without response, and they have shut their eyes;  that they might never see with their eyes and hear with their ears and get the sense of it with their hearts and turn back, and I heal them.’
16  “However, happy are YOUR eyes because they behold, and YOUR ears because they hear.
17  For I truly say to YOU, Many prophets and righteous men desired to see the things YOU are beholding and did not see them, and to hear the things YOU are hearing and did not hear them.
18  “YOU, then, listen to the illustration of the man that sowed.
19  Where anyone hears the word of the kingdom but does not get the sense of it, the wicked one comes and snatches away what has been sown in his heart;  this is the one sown alongside the road.
20  As for the one sown upon the rocky places, this is the one hearing the word and at once accepting it with joy.
21  Yet he has no root in himself but continues for a time, and after tribulation or persecution has arisen on account of the word he is at once stumbled.
22  As for the one sown among the thorns, this is the one hearing the word, but the anxiety of this system of things and the deceptive power of riches choke the word, and he becomes unfruitful.
23  As for the one sown upon the fine soil, this is the one hearing the word and getting the sense of it, who really does bear fruit and produces, this one a hundredfold, that one sixty, the other thirty.”
24  Another illustration he set before them, saying: “The kingdom of the heavens has become like a man that sowed fine seed in his field.
25  While men were sleeping, his enemy came and oversowed weeds in among the wheat, and left.
26  When the blade sprouted and produced fruit, then the weeds appeared also.
27  So the slaves of the householder came up and said to him, ‘Master, did you not sow fine seed in your field? How, then, does it come to have weeds?’
28  He said to them, ‘An enemy, a man, did this.’ They said to him, ‘Do you want us, then, to go out and collect them?’
29  He said, ‘No;  that by no chance, while collecting the weeds, YOU uproot the wheat with them.
30  Let both grow together until the harvest;  and in the harvest season I will tell the reapers, First collect the weeds and bind them in bundles to burn them up, then go to gathering the wheat into my storehouse.’”
31  Another illustration he set before them, saying: “The kingdom of the heavens is like a mustard grain, which a man took and planted in his field; 
32  which is, in fact, the tiniest of all the seeds, but when it has grown it is the largest of the vegetables and becomes a tree, so that the birds of heaven come and find lodging among its branches.”
33  Another illustration he spoke to them: “The kingdom of the heavens is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three large measures of flour, until the whole mass was fermented.”
34  All these things Jesus spoke to the crowds by illustrations. Indeed, without an illustration he would not speak to them; 
35  that there might be fulfilled what was spoken through the prophet who said: “I will open my mouth with illustrations, I will publish things hidden since the founding.”
36  Then after dismissing the crowds he went into the house. And his disciples came to him and said: “Explain to us the illustration of the weeds in the field.”
37  In response he said: “The sower of the fine seed is the Son of man; 
38  the field is the world;  as for the fine seed, these are the sons of the kingdom;  but the weeds are the sons of the wicked one,
39  and the enemy that sowed them is the Devil. The harvest is a conclusion of a system of things, and the reapers are angels.
40  Therefore, just as the weeds are collected and burned with fire, so it will be in the conclusion of the system of things.
41  The Son of man will send forth his angels, and they will collect out from his kingdom all things that cause stumbling and persons who are doing lawlessness,
42  and they will pitch them into the fiery furnace. There is where [their] weeping and the gnashing of [their] teeth will be.
43  At that time the righteous ones will shine as brightly as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Let him that has ears listen.
44  “The kingdom of the heavens is like a treasure hidden in the field, which a man found and hid;  and for the joy he has he goes and sells what things he has and buys that field.
45  “Again the kingdom of the heavens is like a traveling merchant seeking fine pearls.
46  Upon finding one pearl of high value, away he went and promptly sold all the things he had and bought it.
47  “Again the kingdom of the heavens is like a dragnet let down into the sea and gathering up [fish] of every kind.
48  When it got full they hauled it up onto the beach and, sitting down, they collected the fine ones into vessels, but the unsuitable they threw away.
49  That is how it will be in the conclusion of the system of things: the angels will go out and separate the wicked from among the righteous
50  and will cast them into the fiery furnace. There is where [their] weeping and the gnashing of [their] teeth will be.
51  “Did YOU get the sense of all these things?” They said to him: “Yes.”
52  Then he said to them: “That being the case, every public instructor, when taught respecting the kingdom of the heavens, is like a man, a householder, who brings out of his treasure store things new and old.”
53  Now when Jesus had finished these illustrations he went across country from there.
54  And after coming into his home territory he began to teach them in their synagogue, so that they were astounded and said: “Where did this man get this wisdom and these powerful works?
55  Is this not the carpenter’s son? Is not his mother called Mary, and his brothers James and Joseph and Simon and Judas?
56  And his sisters, are they not all with us? Where, then, did this man get all these things?”
57  So they began to stumble at him. But Jesus said to them: “A prophet is not unhonored except in his home territory and in his own house.”
58  And he did not do many powerful works there on account of their lack of faith.
matthew 14
14  At that particular time Herod, the district ruler, heard the report about Jesus
2  and said to his servants: “This is John the Baptist. He was raised up from the dead, and this is why the powerful works are operating in him.”
3  For Herod had arrested John and bound him and put him away in prison on account of Herodias the wife of Philip his brother.
4  For John had been saying to him: “It is not lawful for you to be having her.”
5  However, although he wanted to kill him, he feared the crowd, because they took him for a prophet.
6  But when Herod’s birthday was being celebrated the daughter of Herodias danced at it and pleased Herod so much
7  that he promised with an oath to give her whatever she asked.
8  Then she, under her mother’s coaching, said: “Give me here upon a platter the head of John the Baptist.”
9  Grieved though he was, the king out of regard for his oaths and for those reclining with him commanded it to be given; 
10  and he sent and had John beheaded in the prison.
11  And his head was brought on a platter and given to the maiden, and she brought it to her mother.
12  Finally his disciples came up and removed the corpse and buried him and came and reported to Jesus.
13  At hearing this Jesus withdrew from there by boat into a lonely place for isolation;  but the crowds, getting to hear of it, followed him on foot from the cities.
14  Now when he came forth he saw a great crowd;  and he felt pity for them, and he cured their sick ones.
15  But when evening fell his disciples came to him and said: “The place is lonely and the hour is already far advanced;  send the crowds away, that they may go into the villages and buy themselves things to eat.”
16  However, Jesus said to them: “They do not have to leave: YOU give them something to eat.”
17  They said to him: “We have nothing here but five loaves and two fishes.”
18  He said: “BRING them here to me.”
19  Next he commanded the crowds to recline on the grass and took the five loaves and two fishes, and, looking up to heaven, he said a blessing and, after breaking the loaves, he distributed them to the disciples, the disciples in turn to the crowds.
20  So all ate and were satisfied, and they took up the surplus of fragments, twelve baskets full.
21  Yet those eating were about five thousand men, besides women and young children.
22  Then, without delay, he compelled his disciples to board the boat and go ahead of him to the other side, while he sent the crowds away.
23  Eventually, having sent the crowds away, he went up into the mountain by himself to pray. Though it became late, he was there alone.
24  By now the boat was many hundreds of yards away from land, being hard put to it by the waves, because the wind was against them.
25  But in the fourth watch period of the night he came to them, walking over the sea.
26  When they caught sight of him walking on the sea, the disciples were troubled, saying: “It is an apparition!” And they cried out in their fear.
27  But at once Jesus spoke to them with the words: “Take courage, it is I;  have no fear.”
28  In reply Peter said to him: “Lord, if it is you, command me to come to you over the waters.”
29  He said: “Come!” Thereupon Peter, getting down off the boat, walked over the waters and went toward Jesus.
30  But looking at the windstorm, he got afraid and, after starting to sink, he cried out: “Lord, save me!”
31  Immediately stretching out his hand Jesus caught hold of him and said to him: “You with little faith, why did you give way to doubt?”
32  And after they got up into the boat, the windstorm abated.
33  Then those in the boat did obeisance to him, saying: “You are really God’s Son.”
34  And they got across and came to land in Gennesaret.
35  Upon recognizing him the men of that place sent forth into all that surrounding country, and people brought him all those who were ill.
36  And they went entreating him that they might just touch the fringe of his outer garment;  and all those who touched it were made completely well.
matthew 15
15  Then there came to Jesus from Jerusalem Pharisees and scribes, saying:
2  “Why is it your disciples overstep the tradition of the men of former times? For example, they do not wash their hands when about to eat a meal.”
3  In reply he said to them: “Why is it YOU also overstep the commandment of God because of YOUR tradition?
4  For example, God said, ‘Honor your father and your mother’;  and, ‘Let him that reviles father or mother end up in death.’
5  But YOU say, ‘Whoever says to his father or mother: “Whatever I have by which you might get benefit from me is a gift dedicated to God,”
6  he must not honor his father at all.’ And so YOU have made the word of God invalid because of YOUR tradition.
7  YOU hypocrites, Isaiah aptly prophesied about YOU, when he said,
8  ‘This people honors me with their lips, yet their heart is far removed from me.
9  It is in vain that they keep worshiping me, because they teach commands of men as doctrines.’”
10  With that he called the crowd near and said to them: “Listen and get the sense of it:
11  Not what enters into [his] mouth defiles a man;  but it is what proceeds out of [his] mouth that defiles a man.”
12  Then the disciples came up and said to him: “Do you know that the Pharisees stumbled at hearing what you said?”
13  In reply he said: “Every plant that my heavenly Father did not plant will be uprooted.
14  LET them be. Blind guides is what they are. If, then, a blind man guides a blind man, both will fall into a pit.”
15  By way of response Peter said to him: “Make the illustration plain to us.”
16  At this he said: “Are YOU also yet without understanding?
17  Are YOU not aware that everything entering into the mouth passes along into the intestines and is discharged into the sewer?
18  However, the things proceeding out of the mouth come out of the heart, and those things defile a man.
19  For example, out of the heart come wicked reasonings, murders, adulteries, fornications, thieveries, false testimonies, blasphemies.
20  These are the things defiling a man;  but to take a meal with unwashed hands does not defile a man.”
21  Leaving there, Jesus now withdrew into the parts of Tyre and Sidon.
22  And, look! a Phoenician woman from those regions came out and cried aloud, saying: “Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David. My daughter is badly demonized.”
23  But he did not say a word in answer to her. So his disciples came up and began to request him: “Send her away;  because she keeps crying out after us.”
24  In answer he said: “I was not sent forth to any but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.”
25  When the woman came she began doing obeisance to him, saying: “Lord, help me!”
26  In answer he said: “It is not right to take the bread of the children and throw it to little dogs.”
27  She said: “Yes, Lord;  but really the little dogs do eat of the crumbs falling from the table of their masters.”
28  Then Jesus said in reply to her: “O woman, great is your faith;  let it happen to you as you wish.” And her daughter was healed from that hour on.
29  Crossing country from there, Jesus next came near the sea of Galilee, and, after going up into the mountain, he was sitting there.
30  Then great crowds approached him, having along with them people that were lame, maimed, blind, dumb, and many otherwise, and they fairly threw them at his feet, and he cured them; 
31  so that the crowd felt amazement as they saw the dumb speaking and the lame walking and the blind seeing, and they glorified the God of Israel.
32  But Jesus called his disciples to him and said: “I feel pity for the crowd, because it is already three days that they have stayed with me and they have nothing to eat;  and I do not want to send them away fasting. They may possibly give out on the road.”
33  However, the disciples said to him: “Where are we in this lonely place going to get sufficient loaves to satisfy a crowd of this size?”
34  At this Jesus said to them: “How many loaves have YOU?” They said: “Seven, and a few little fishes.”
35  So, after instructing the crowd to recline upon the ground,
36  he took the seven loaves and the fishes and, after offering thanks, he broke them and began distributing to the disciples, the disciples in turn to the crowds.
37  And all ate and were satisfied, and as a surplus of fragments they took up seven provision baskets full.
38  Yet those eating were four thousand men, besides women and young children.
39  Finally, after sending the crowds away, he got into the boat and came into the regions of Magadan.
matthew 16
16  Here the Pharisees and Sadducees approached him and, to tempt him, they asked him to display to them a sign from heaven.
2  In reply he said to them: “[[When evening falls YOU are accustomed to say, ‘It will be fair weather, for the sky is fire-red’; 
3  and at morning, ‘It will be wintry, rainy weather today, for the sky is fire-red, but gloomy-looking.’ YOU know how to interpret the appearance of the sky, but the signs of the times YOU cannot interpret.]]
4  A wicked and adulterous generation keeps on seeking for a sign, but no sign will be given it except the sign of Jonah.” With that he went away, leaving them behind.
5  Now the disciples crossed to the other side and forgot to take loaves along.
6  Jesus said to them: “Keep YOUR eyes open and watch out for the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
7  So they began to reason among themselves, saying: “We did not take any loaves along.”
8  Knowing this, Jesus said: “Why are YOU doing this reasoning among yourselves, because YOU have no loaves, YOU with little faith?
9  Do YOU not yet see the point, or do YOU not remember the five loaves in the case of the five thousand and how many baskets YOU took up?
10  Or the seven loaves in the case of the four thousand and how many provision baskets YOU took up?
11  How is it YOU do not discern that I did not talk to YOU about loaves? But watch out for the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
12  Then they grasped that he said to watch out, not for the leaven of the loaves, but for the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
13  Now when he had come into the parts of Caesarea Philippi, Jesus went asking his disciples: “Who are men saying the Son of man is?”
14  They said: “Some say John the Baptist, others Elijah, still others Jeremiah or one of the prophets.”
15  He said to them: “YOU, though, who do YOU say I am?”
16  In answer Simon Peter said: “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.”
17  In response Jesus said to him: “Happy you are, Simon son of Jonah, because flesh and blood did not reveal [it] to you, but my Father who is in the heavens did.
18  Also, I say to you, You are Peter, and on this rock-mass I will build my congregation, and the gates of Hades will not overpower it.
19  I will give you the keys of the kingdom of the heavens, and whatever you may bind on earth will be the thing bound in the heavens, and whatever you may loose on earth will be the thing loosed in the heavens.”
20  Then he sternly charged the disciples not to say to anybody that he was the Christ.
21  From that time forward Jesus Christ commenced showing his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from the older men and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and on the third day be raised up.
22  At this Peter took him aside and commenced rebuking him, saying: “Be kind to yourself, Lord;  you will not have this [destiny] at all.”
23  But, turning his back, he said to Peter: “Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me, because you think, not God’s thoughts, but those of men.”
24  Then Jesus said to his disciples: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake and continually follow me.
25  For whoever wants to save his soul will lose it;  but whoever loses his soul for my sake will find it.
26  For what benefit will it be to a man if he gains the whole world but forfeits his soul? or what will a man give in exchange for his soul?
27  For the Son of man is destined to come in the glory of his Father with his angels, and then he will recompense each one according to his behavior.
28  Truly I say to YOU that there are some of those standing here that will not taste death at all until first they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.”
matthew 17
17  Six days later Jesus took Peter and James and John his brother along and brought them up into a lofty mountain by themselves.
2  And he was transfigured before them, and his face shone as the sun, and his outer garments became brilliant as the light.
3  And, look! there appeared to them Moses and Elijah, conversing with him.
4  Responsively Peter said to Jesus: “Lord, it is fine for us to be here. If you wish, I will erect three tents here, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah.”
5  While he was yet speaking, look! a bright cloud overshadowed them, and, look! a voice out of the cloud, saying: “This is my Son, the beloved, whom I have approved;  listen to him.”
6  At hearing this the disciples fell upon their faces and became very much afraid.
7  Then Jesus came near and, touching them, said: “Get up and have no fear.”
8  When they raised their eyes, they saw no one but Jesus himself only.
9  And as they were descending from the mountain, Jesus commanded them, saying: “Tell the vision to no one until the Son of man is raised up from the dead.”
10  However, the disciples put the question to him: “Why, then, do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?”
11  In reply he said: “Elijah, indeed, is coming and will restore all things.
12  However, I say to YOU that Elijah has already come and they did not recognize him but did with him the things they wanted. In this way also the Son of man is destined to suffer at their hands.”
13  Then the disciples perceived that he spoke to them about John the Baptist.
14  And when they came toward the crowd, a man approached him, kneeling down to him and saying:
15  “Lord, have mercy on my son, because he is an epileptic and is ill, for he falls often into the fire and often into the water; 
16  and I brought him to your disciples, but they could not cure him.”
17  In reply Jesus said: “O faithless and twisted generation, how long must I continue with YOU? How long must I put up with YOU? Bring him here to me.”
18  Then Jesus rebuked it, and the demon came out of him;  and the boy was cured from that hour.
19  Thereupon the disciples came up to Jesus privately and said: “Why is it we could not expel it?”
20  He said to them: “Because of YOUR little faith. For truly I say to YOU, If YOU have faith the size of a mustard grain, YOU will say to this mountain, ‘Transfer from here to there,’ and it will transfer, and nothing will be impossible for YOU.”
21  ——
22  It was while they were gathered together in Galilee that Jesus said to them: “The Son of man is destined to be betrayed into men’s hands,
23  and they will kill him, and the third day he will be raised up.” Consequently they were very much grieved.
24  After they arrived in Capernaum the men collecting the two drachmas [tax] approached Peter and said: “Does YOUR teacher not pay the two drachmas [tax]?”
25  He said: “Yes.” However, when he entered the house Jesus got ahead of him by saying: “What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth receive duties or head tax? From their sons or from the strangers?”
26  When he said: “From the strangers,” Jesus said to him: “Really, then, the sons are tax-free.
27  But that we do not cause them to stumble, you go to the sea, cast a fishhook, and take the first fish coming up and, when you open its mouth, you will find a stater coin. Take that and give it to them for me and you.”
matthew 18
18  In that hour the disciples came near to Jesus and said: “Who really is greatest in the kingdom of the heavens?”
2  So, calling a young child to him, he set it in their midst
3  and said: “Truly I say to YOU, Unless YOU turn around and become as young children, YOU will by no means enter into the kingdom of the heavens.
4  Therefore, whoever will humble himself like this young child is the one that is the greatest in the kingdom of the heavens; 
5  and whoever receives one such young child on the basis of my name receives me [also].
6  But whoever stumbles one of these little ones who put faith in me, it is more beneficial for him to have hung around his neck a millstone such as is turned by an ass and to be sunk in the wide, open sea.
7  “Woe to the world due to the stumbling blocks! Of course, the stumbling blocks must of necessity come, but woe to the man through whom the stumbling block comes!
8  If, then, your hand or your foot is making you stumble, cut it off and throw it away from you;  it is finer for you to enter into life maimed or lame than to be thrown with two hands or two feet into the everlasting fire.
9  Also, if your eye is making you stumble, tear it out and throw it away from you;  it is finer for you to enter one-eyed into life than to be thrown with two eyes into the fiery Gehenna.
10  See to it that YOU men do not despise one of these little ones;  for I tell YOU that their angels in heaven always behold the face of my Father who is in heaven.
11  ——
12  “What do YOU think? If a certain man comes to have a hundred sheep and one of them gets strayed, will he not leave the ninety-nine upon the mountains and set out on a search for the one that is straying?
13  And if he happens to find it, I certainly tell YOU, he rejoices more over it than over the ninety-nine that have not strayed.
14  Likewise it is not a desirable thing with my Father who is in heaven for one of these little ones to perish.
15  “Moreover, if your brother commits a sin, go lay bare his fault between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you have gained your brother.
16  But if he does not listen, take along with you one or two more, in order that at the mouth of two or three witnesses every matter may be established.
17  If he does not listen to them, speak to the congregation. If he does not listen even to the congregation, let him be to you just as a man of the nations and as a tax collector.
18  “Truly I say to YOU men, Whatever things YOU may bind on earth will be things bound in heaven, and whatever things YOU may loose on earth will be things loosed in heaven.
19  Again I truly say to YOU, If two of YOU on earth agree concerning anything of importance that they should request, it will take place for them due to my Father in heaven.
20  For where there are two or three gathered together in my name, there I am in their midst.”
21  Then Peter came up and said to him: “Lord, how many times is my brother to sin against me and am I to forgive him? Up to seven times?”
22  Jesus said to him: “I say to you, not, Up to seven times, but, Up to seventy-seven times.
23  “That is why the kingdom of the heavens has become like a man, a king, that wanted to settle accounts with his slaves.
24  When he started to settle them, there was brought in a man who owed him ten thousand talents [=60,000,000 denarii].
25  But because he did not have the means to pay [it] back, his master ordered him and his wife and his children and all the things he had to be sold and payment to be made.
26  Therefore the slave fell down and began to do obeisance to him, saying, ‘Be patient with me and I will pay back everything to you.’
27  Moved to pity at this, the master of that slave let him off and canceled his debt.
28  But that slave went out and found one of his fellow slaves that was owing him a hundred denarii;  and, grabbing him, he began to choke him, saying, ‘Pay back whatever you owe.’
29  Therefore his fellow slave fell down and began to entreat him, saying, ‘Be patient with me and I will pay you back.’
30  However, he was not willing, but went off and had him thrown into prison until he should pay back what was owing.
31  When, therefore, his fellow slaves saw the things that had happened, they became very much grieved, and they went and made clear to their master all the things that had happened.
32  Then his master summoned him and said to him, ‘Wicked slave, I canceled all that debt for you, when you entreated me.
33  Ought you not, in turn, to have had mercy on your fellow slave, as I also had mercy on you?’
34  With that his master, provoked to wrath, delivered him to the jailers, until he should pay back all that was owing.
35  In like manner my heavenly Father will also deal with YOU if YOU do not forgive each one his brother from YOUR hearts.”
matthew 19
19  Now when Jesus had finished these words, he departed from Galilee and came to the frontiers of Judea across the Jordan.
2  Also, great crowds followed him, and he cured them there.
3  And Pharisees came up to him, intent on tempting him and saying: “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife on every sort of ground?”
4  In reply he said: “Did YOU not read that he who created them from [the] beginning made them male and female
5  and said, ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and his mother and will stick to his wife, and the two will be one flesh’?
6  So that they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore, what God has yoked together let no man put apart.”
7  They said to him: “Why, then, did Moses prescribe giving a certificate of dismissal and divorcing her?”
8  He said to them: “Moses, out of regard for YOUR hardheartedness, made the concession to YOU of divorcing YOUR wives, but such has not been the case from [the] beginning.
9  I say to YOU that whoever divorces his wife, except on the ground of fornication, and marries another commits adultery.”
10  The disciples said to him: “If such is the situation of a man with his wife, it is not advisable to marry.”
11  He said to them: “Not all men make room for the saying, but only those who have the gift.
12  For there are eunuchs that were born such from their mother’s womb, and there are eunuchs that were made eunuchs by men, and there are eunuchs that have made themselves eunuchs on account of the kingdom of the heavens. Let him that can make room for it make room for it.”
13  Then young children were brought to him, for him to put his hands upon them and offer prayer;  but the disciples reprimanded them.
14  Jesus, however, said: “Let the young children alone, and stop hindering them from coming to me, for the kingdom of the heavens belongs to suchlike ones.”
15  And he put his hands upon them and went from there.
16  Now, look! a certain one came up to him and said: “Teacher, what good must I do in order to get everlasting life?”
17  He said to him: “Why do you ask me about what is good? One there is that is good. If, though, you want to enter into life, observe the commandments continually.”
18  He said to him: “Which ones?” Jesus said: “Why, You must not murder, You must not commit adultery, You must not steal, You must not bear false witness,
19  Honor [your] father and [your] mother, and, You must love your neighbor as yourself.”
20  The young man said to him: “I have kept all these;  what yet am I lacking?”
21  Jesus said to him: “If you want to be perfect, go sell your belongings and give to the poor and you will have treasure in heaven, and come be my follower.”
22  When the young man heard this saying, he went away grieved, for he was holding many possessions.
23  But Jesus said to his disciples: “Truly I say to YOU that it will be a difficult thing for a rich man to get into the kingdom of the heavens.
24  Again I say to YOU, It is easier for a camel to get through a needle’s eye than for a rich man to get into the kingdom of God.”
25  When the disciples heard that, they expressed very great surprise, saying: “Who really can be saved?”
26  Looking them in the face, Jesus said to them: “With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.”
27  Then Peter said to him in reply: “Look! We have left all things and followed you;  what actually will there be for us?”
28  Jesus said to them: “Truly I say to YOU, In the re-creation, when the Son of man sits down upon his glorious throne, YOU who have followed me will also yourselves sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
29  And everyone that has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or lands for the sake of my name will receive many times more and will inherit everlasting life.
30  “But many that are first will be last and the last first.
matthew 20
20  “For the kingdom of the heavens is like a man, a householder, who went out early in the morning to hire workers for his vineyard.
2  When he had agreed with the workers for a denarius a day, he sent them forth into his vineyard.
3  Going out also about the third hour, he saw others standing unemployed in the marketplace; 
4  and to those he said, ‘YOU also, go into the vineyard, and whatever is just I will give YOU.’
5  So off they went. Again he went out about the sixth and the ninth hour and did likewise.
6  Finally, about the eleventh hour he went out and found others standing, and he said to them, ‘Why have YOU been standing here all day unemployed?’
7  They said to him, ‘Because nobody has hired us.’ He said to them, ‘YOU too go into the vineyard.’
8  “When it became evening, the master of the vineyard said to his man in charge, ‘Call the workers and pay them their wages, proceeding from the last to the first.’
9  When the eleventh-hour men came, they each received a denarius.
10  So, when the first came, they concluded they would receive more;  but they also received pay at the rate of a denarius.
11  On receiving it they began to murmur against the householder
12  and said, ‘These last put in one hour’s work;  still you made them equal to us who bore the burden of the day and the burning heat!’
13  But in reply to one of them he said, ‘Fellow, I do you no wrong. You agreed with me for a denarius, did you not?
14  Take what is yours and go. I want to give to this last one the same as to you.
15  Is it not lawful for me to do what I want with my own things? Or is your eye wicked because I am good?’
16  In this way the last ones will be first, and the first ones last.”
17  Being now about to go up to Jerusalem, Jesus took the twelve disciples off privately and said to them on the road:
18  “Look! We are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man will be delivered up to the chief priests and scribes, and they will condemn him to death,
19  and will deliver him up to [men of] the nations to make fun of and to scourge and to impale, and the third day he will be raised up.”
20  Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee approached him with her sons, doing obeisance and asking for something from him.
21  He said to her: “What do you want?” She said to him: “Give the word that these my two sons may sit down, one at your right hand and one at your left, in your kingdom.”
22  Jesus said in answer: “YOU men do not know what YOU are asking for. Can YOU drink the cup that I am about to drink?” They said to him: “We can.”
23  He said to them: “YOU will indeed drink my cup, but this sitting down at my right hand and at my left is not mine to give, but it belongs to those for whom it has been prepared by my Father.”
24  When the ten others heard of this, they became indignant at the two brothers.
25  But Jesus, calling them to him, said: “YOU know that the rulers of the nations lord it over them and the great men wield authority over them.
26  This is not the way among YOU;  but whoever wants to become great among YOU must be YOUR minister,
27  and whoever wants to be first among YOU must be YOUR slave.
28  Just as the Son of man came, not to be ministered to, but to minister and to give his soul a ransom in exchange for many.”
29  Now as they were going out of Jericho a great crowd followed him.
30  And, look! two blind men sitting beside the road, when they heard that Jesus was passing by, cried out, saying: “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!”
31  But the crowd sternly told them to keep silent;  yet they cried all the louder, saying: “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!”
32  So Jesus stopped, called them and said: “What do YOU want me to do for YOU?”
33  They said to him: “Lord, let our eyes be opened.”
34  Moved with pity, Jesus touched their eyes, and immediately they received sight, and they followed him.
matthew 21
21  Well, when they got close to Jerusalem and arrived at Bethphage on the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent forth two disciples,
2  saying to them: “Be on YOUR way into the village that is within sight of YOU, and YOU will at once find an ass tied, and a colt with her;  untie them and bring them to me.
3  And if someone says anything to YOU, YOU must say, ‘The Lord needs them.’ At that he will immediately send them forth.”
4  This actually took place that there might be fulfilled what was spoken through the prophet, saying:
5  “TELL the daughter of Zion, ‘Look! Your King is coming to you, mild-tempered, and mounted upon an ass, yes, upon a colt, the offspring of a beast of burden.’”
6  So the disciples got on their way and did just as Jesus ordered them.
7  And they brought the ass and its colt, and they put upon these their outer garments, and he seated himself upon them.
8  Most of the crowd spread their outer garments on the road, while others began cutting down branches from the trees and spreading them on the road.
9  As for the crowds, those going ahead of him and those following kept crying out: “Save, we pray, the Son of David! Blessed is he that comes in Jehovah’s name! Save him, we pray, in the heights above!”
10  Now when he entered into Jerusalem, the whole city was set in commotion, saying: “Who is this?”
11  The crowds kept telling: “This is the prophet Jesus, from Nazareth of Galilee!”
12  And Jesus entered into the temple and threw out all those selling and buying in the temple, and overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves.
13  And he said to them: “It is written, ‘My house will be called a house of prayer,’ but YOU are making it a cave of robbers.”
14  Also, blind and lame persons came up to him in the temple, and he cured them.
15  When the chief priests and the scribes saw the marvelous things he did and the boys that were crying out in the temple and saying: “Save, we pray, the Son of David!” they became indignant
16  and said to him: “Do you hear what these are saying?” Jesus said to them: “Yes. Did YOU never read this, ‘Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings you have furnished praise’?”
17  And leaving them behind he went outside the city to Bethany and passed the night there.
18  While returning to the city early in the morning, he got hungry.
19  And he caught sight of a fig tree by the road and went to it, but he found nothing on it except leaves only, and he said to it: “Let no fruit come from you anymore forever.” And the fig tree withered instantly.
20  But when the disciples saw this, they wondered, saying: “How is it that the fig tree withered instantly?”
21  In answer Jesus said to them: “Truly I say to YOU, If only YOU have faith and do not doubt, not only will YOU do what I did to the fig tree, but also if YOU say to this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and cast into the sea,’ it will happen.
22  And all the things YOU ask in prayer, having faith, YOU will receive.”
23  Now after he went into the temple, the chief priests and the older men of the people came up to him while he was teaching and said: “By what authority do you do these things? And who gave you this authority?”
24  In reply Jesus said to them: “I, also, will ask YOU one thing. If YOU tell it to me, I also will tell YOU by what authority I do these things:
25  The baptism by John, from what source was it? From heaven or from men?” But they began to reason among themselves, saying: “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say to us, ‘Why, then, did YOU not believe him?’
26  If, though, we say, ‘From men,’ we have the crowd to fear, for they all hold John as a prophet.”
27  So in answer to Jesus they said: “We do not know.” He, in turn, said to them: “Neither am I telling YOU by what authority I do these things.
28  “What do YOU think? A man had two children. Going up to the first, he said, ‘Child, go work today in the vineyard.’
29  In answer this one said, ‘I will, sir,’ but did not go out.
30  Approaching the second, he said the same. In reply this one said, ‘I will not.’ Afterwards he felt regret and went out.
31  Which of the two did the will of [his] father?” They said: “The latter.” Jesus said to them: “Truly I say to YOU that the tax collectors and the harlots are going ahead of YOU into the kingdom of God.
32  For John came to YOU in a way of righteousness, but YOU did not believe him. However, the tax collectors and the harlots believed him, and YOU, although YOU saw [this], did not feel regret afterwards so as to believe him.
33  “Hear another illustration: There was a man, a householder, who planted a vineyard and put a fence around it and dug a winepress in it and erected a tower, and let it out to cultivators, and traveled abroad.
34  When the season of the fruits came around, he dispatched his slaves to the cultivators to get his fruits.
35  However, the cultivators took his slaves, and one they beat up, another they killed, another they stoned.
36  Again he dispatched other slaves, more than the first, but they did the same to these.
37  Lastly he dispatched his son to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’
38  On seeing the son the cultivators said among themselves, ‘This is the heir;  come, let us kill him and get his inheritance!’
39  So they took him and threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.
40  Therefore, when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those cultivators?”
41  They said to him: “Because they are evil, he will bring an evil destruction upon them and will let out the vineyard to other cultivators, who will render him the fruits when they become due.”
42  Jesus said to them: “Did YOU never read in the Scriptures, ‘The stone that the builders rejected is the one that has become the chief cornerstone. From Jehovah this has come to be, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?
43  This is why I say to YOU, The kingdom of God will be taken from YOU and be given to a nation producing its fruits.
44  Also, the person falling upon this stone will be shattered. As for anyone upon whom it falls, it will pulverize him.”
45  Now when the chief priests and the Pharisees had heard his illustrations, they took note that he was speaking about them.
46  But, although they were seeking to seize him, they feared the crowds, because these held him to be a prophet.
matthew 22
22  In further reply Jesus again spoke to them with illustrations, saying:
2  “The kingdom of the heavens has become like a man, a king, that made a marriage feast for his son.
3  And he sent forth his slaves to call those invited to the marriage feast, but they were unwilling to come.
4  Again he sent forth other slaves, saying, ‘Tell those invited: “Look! I have prepared my dinner, my bulls and fattened animals are slaughtered, and all things are ready. Come to the marriage feast.”’
5  But unconcerned they went off, one to his own field, another to his commercial business; 
6  but the rest, laying hold of his slaves, treated them insolently and killed them.
7  “But the king grew wrathful, and sent his armies and destroyed those murderers and burned their city.
8  Then he said to his slaves, ‘The marriage feast indeed is ready, but those invited were not worthy.
9  Therefore go to the roads leading out of the city, and anyone YOU find invite to the marriage feast.’
10  Accordingly those slaves went out to the roads and gathered together all they found, both wicked and good;  and the room for the wedding ceremonies was filled with those reclining at the table.
11  “When the king came in to inspect the guests he caught sight there of a man not clothed with a marriage garment.
12  So he said to him, ‘Fellow, how did you get in here not having on a marriage garment?’ He was rendered speechless.
13  Then the king said to his servants, ‘Bind him hand and foot and throw him out into the darkness outside. There is where [his] weeping and the gnashing of [his] teeth will be.’
14  “For there are many invited, but few chosen.”
15  Then the Pharisees went their way and took counsel together in order to trap him in his speech.
16  So they dispatched to him their disciples, together with party followers of Herod, saying: “Teacher, we know you are truthful and teach the way of God in truth, and you do not care for anybody, for you do not look upon men’s outward appearance.
17  Tell us, therefore, What do you think? Is it lawful to pay head tax to Caesar or not?”
18  But Jesus, knowing their wickedness, said: “Why do YOU put me to the test, hypocrites?
19  Show me the head tax coin.” They brought him a denarius.
20  And he said to them: “Whose image and inscription is this?”
21  They said: “Caesar’s.” Then he said to them: “Pay back, therefore, Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to God.”
22  Well, when they heard [that], they marveled, and leaving him they went off.
23  On that day Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came up to him and asked him:
24  “Teacher, Moses said, ‘If any man dies without having children, his brother must take his wife in marriage and raise up offspring for his brother.’
25  Now there were seven brothers with us;  and the first married and deceased, and, not having offspring, he left his wife for his brother.
26  It went the same way also with the second and the third, until through all seven.
27  Last of all the woman died.
28  Consequently, in the resurrection, to which of the seven will she be wife? For they all got her.”
29  In reply Jesus said to them: “YOU are mistaken, because YOU know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God; 
30  for in the resurrection neither do men marry nor are women given in marriage, but are as angels in heaven.
31  As regards the resurrection of the dead, did YOU not read what was spoken to YOU by God, saying,
32  ‘I am the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob’? He is the God, not of the dead, but of the living.”
33  On hearing [that], the crowds were astounded at his teaching.
34  After the Pharisees heard that he had put the Sadducees to silence, they came together in one group.
35  And one of them, versed in the Law, asked, testing him:
36  “Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the Law?”
37  He said to him: “‘You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind.’
38  This is the greatest and first commandment.
39  The second, like it, is this, ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’
40  On these two commandments the whole Law hangs, and the Prophets.”
41  Now while the Pharisees were gathered together Jesus asked them:
42  “What do YOU think about the Christ? Whose son is he?” They said to him: “David’s.”
43  He said to them: “How, then, is it that David by inspiration calls him ‘Lord,’ saying,
44  ‘Jehovah said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies beneath your feet”’?
45  If, therefore, David calls him ‘Lord,’ how is he his son?”
46  And nobody was able to say a word in reply to him, nor did anyone dare from that day on to question him any further.
matthew 23
23  Then Jesus spoke to the crowds and to his disciples, saying:
2  “The scribes and the Pharisees have seated themselves in the seat of Moses.
3  Therefore all the things they tell YOU, do and observe, but do not do according to their deeds, for they say but do not perform.
4  They bind up heavy loads and put them upon the shoulders of men, but they themselves are not willing to budge them with their finger.
5  All the works they do they do to be viewed by men;  for they broaden the [scripture-containing] cases that they wear as safeguards, and enlarge the fringes [of their garments].
6  They like the most prominent place at evening meals and the front seats in the synagogues,
7  and the greetings in the marketplaces and to be called Rabbi by men.
8  But YOU, do not YOU be called Rabbi, for one is YOUR teacher, whereas all YOU are brothers.
9  Moreover, do not call anyone YOUR father on earth, for one is YOUR Father, the heavenly One.
10  Neither be called ‘leaders,’ for YOUR Leader is one, the Christ.
11  But the greatest one among YOU must be YOUR minister.
12  Whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.
13  “Woe to YOU, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because YOU shut up the kingdom of the heavens before men;  for YOU yourselves do not go in, neither do YOU permit those on their way in to go in.
14  ——
15  “Woe to YOU, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because YOU traverse sea and dry land to make one proselyte, and when he becomes one YOU make him a subject for Gehenna twice as much so as yourselves.
16  “Woe to YOU, blind guides, who say, ‘If anyone swears by the temple, it is nothing;  but if anyone swears by the gold of the temple, he is under obligation.’
17  Fools and blind ones! Which, in fact, is greater, the gold or the temple that has sanctified the gold?
18  Also, ‘If anyone swears by the altar, it is nothing;  but if anyone swears by the gift on it, he is under obligation.’
19  Blind ones! Which, in fact, is greater, the gift or the altar that sanctifies the gift?
20  Therefore he that swears by the altar is swearing by it and by all the things on it; 
21  and he that swears by the temple is swearing by it and by him that is inhabiting it; 
22  and he that swears by heaven is swearing by the throne of God and by him that is sitting on it.
23  “Woe to YOU, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because YOU give the tenth of the mint and the dill and the cumin, but YOU have disregarded the weightier matters of the Law, namely, justice and mercy and faithfulness. These things it was binding to do, yet not to disregard the other things.
24  Blind guides, who strain out the gnat but gulp down the camel!
25  “Woe to YOU, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because YOU cleanse the outside of the cup and of the dish, but inside they are full of plunder and immoderateness.
26  Blind Pharisee, cleanse first the inside of the cup and of the dish, that the outside of it also may become clean.
27  “Woe to YOU, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because YOU resemble whitewashed graves, which outwardly indeed appear beautiful but inside are full of dead men’s bones and of every sort of uncleanness.
28  In that way YOU also, outwardly indeed, appear righteous to men, but inside YOU are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.
29  “Woe to YOU, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because YOU build the graves of the prophets and decorate the memorial tombs of the righteous ones,
30  and YOU say, ‘If we were in the days of our forefathers, we would not be sharers with them in the blood of the prophets.’
31  Therefore YOU are bearing witness against yourselves that YOU are sons of those who murdered the prophets.
32  Well, then, fill up the measure of YOUR forefathers.
33  “Serpents, offspring of vipers, how are YOU to flee from the judgment of Gehenna?
34  For this reason, here I am sending forth to YOU prophets and wise men and public instructors. Some of them YOU will kill and impale, and some of them YOU will scourge in YOUR synagogues and persecute from city to city; 
35  that there may come upon YOU all the righteous blood spilled on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah son of Barachiah, whom YOU murdered between the sanctuary and the altar.
36  Truly I say to YOU, All these things will come upon this generation.
37  “Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the killer of the prophets and stoner of those sent forth to her,—how often I wanted to gather your children together, the way a hen gathers her chicks together under her wings! But YOU people did not want it.
38  Look! YOUR house is abandoned to YOU.
39  For I say to YOU, YOU will by no means see me from henceforth until YOU say, ‘Blessed is he that comes in Jehovah’s name!’”
matthew 24
24  Departing now, Jesus was on his way from the temple, but his disciples approached to show him the buildings of the temple.
2  In response he said to them: “Do YOU not behold all these things? Truly I say to YOU, By no means will a stone be left here upon a stone and not be thrown down.”
3  While he was sitting upon the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately, saying: “Tell us, When will these things be, and what will be the sign of your presence and of the conclusion of the system of things?”
4  And in answer Jesus said to them: “Look out that nobody misleads YOU; 
5  for many will come on the basis of my name, saying, ‘I am the Christ,’ and will mislead many.
6  YOU are going to hear of wars and reports of wars;  see that YOU are not terrified. For these things must take place, but the end is not yet.
7  “For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be food shortages and earthquakes in one place after another.
8  All these things are a beginning of pangs of distress.
9  “Then people will deliver YOU up to tribulation and will kill YOU, and YOU will be objects of hatred by all the nations on account of my name.
10  Then, also, many will be stumbled and will betray one another and will hate one another.
11  And many false prophets will arise and mislead many; 
12  and because of the increasing of lawlessness the love of the greater number will cool off.
13  But he that has endured to the end is the one that will be saved.
14  And this good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations;  and then the end will come.
15  “Therefore, when YOU catch sight of the disgusting thing that causes desolation, as spoken of through Daniel the prophet, standing in a holy place, (let the reader use discernment,)
16  then let those in Judea begin fleeing to the mountains.
17  Let the man on the housetop not come down to take the goods out of his house; 
18  and let the man in the field not return to the house to pick up his outer garment.
19  Woe to the pregnant women and those suckling a baby in those days!
20  Keep praying that YOUR flight may not occur in wintertime, nor on the sabbath day; 
21  for then there will be great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now, no, nor will occur again.
22  In fact, unless those days were cut short, no flesh would be saved;  but on account of the chosen ones those days will be cut short.
23  “Then if anyone says to YOU, ‘Look! Here is the Christ,’ or, ‘There!’ do not believe it.
24  For false Christs and false prophets will arise and will give great signs and wonders so as to mislead, if possible, even the chosen ones.
25  Look! I have forewarned YOU.
26  Therefore, if people say to YOU, ‘Look! He is in the wilderness,’ do not go out;  ‘Look! He is in the inner chambers,’ do not believe it.
27  For just as the lightning comes out of eastern parts and shines over to western parts, so the presence of the Son of man will be.
28  Wherever the carcass is, there the eagles will be gathered together.
29  “Immediately after the tribulation of those days the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light, and the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
30  And then the sign of the Son of man will appear in heaven, and then all the tribes of the earth will beat themselves in lamentation, and they will see the Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.
31  And he will send forth his angels with a great trumpet sound, and they will gather his chosen ones together from the four winds, from one extremity of the heavens to their other extremity.
32  “Now learn from the fig tree as an illustration this point: Just as soon as its young branch grows tender and it puts forth leaves, YOU know that summer is near.
33  Likewise also YOU, when YOU see all these things, know that he is near at the doors.
34  Truly I say to YOU that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things occur.
35  Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will by no means pass away.
36  “Concerning that day and hour nobody knows, neither the angels of the heavens nor the Son, but only the Father.
37  For just as the days of Noah were, so the presence of the Son of man will be.
38  For as they were in those days before the flood, eating and drinking, men marrying and women being given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark; 
39  and they took no note until the flood came and swept them all away, so the presence of the Son of man will be.
40  Then two men will be in the field: one will be taken along and the other be abandoned; 
41  two women will be grinding at the hand mill: one will be taken along and the other be abandoned.
42  Keep on the watch, therefore, because YOU do not know on what day YOUR Lord is coming.
43  “But know one thing, that if the householder had known in what watch the thief was coming, he would have kept awake and not allowed his house to be broken into.
44  On this account YOU too prove yourselves ready, because at an hour that YOU do not think to be it, the Son of man is coming.
45  “Who really is the faithful and discreet slave whom his master appointed over his domestics, to give them their food at the proper time?
46  Happy is that slave if his master on arriving finds him doing so.
47  Truly I say to YOU, He will appoint him over all his belongings.
48  “But if ever that evil slave should say in his heart, ‘My master is delaying,’
49  and should start to beat his fellow slaves and should eat and drink with the confirmed drunkards,
50  the master of that slave will come on a day that he does not expect and in an hour that he does not know,
51  and will punish him with the greatest severity and will assign him his part with the hypocrites. There is where [his] weeping and the gnashing of [his] teeth will be.
matthew 25
25  “Then the kingdom of the heavens will become like ten virgins that took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom.
2  Five of them were foolish, and five were discreet.
3  For the foolish took their lamps but took no oil with them,
4  whereas the discreet took oil in their receptacles with their lamps.
5  While the bridegroom was delaying, they all nodded and went to sleep.
6  Right in the middle of the night there arose a cry, ‘Here is the bridegroom! Be on YOUR way out to meet him.’
7  Then all those virgins rose and put their lamps in order.
8  The foolish said to the discreet, ‘Give us some of YOUR oil, because our lamps are about to go out.’
9  The discreet answered with the words, ‘Perhaps there may not be quite enough for us and YOU. Be on YOUR way, instead, to those who sell it and buy for yourselves.’
10  While they were going off to buy, the bridegroom arrived, and the virgins that were ready went in with him to the marriage feast;  and the door was shut.
11  Afterwards the rest of the virgins also came, saying, ‘Sir, sir, open to us!’
12  In answer he said, ‘I tell YOU the truth, I do not know YOU.’
13  “Keep on the watch, therefore, because YOU know neither the day nor the hour.
14  “For it is just as when a man, about to travel abroad, summoned slaves of his and committed to them his belongings.
15  And to one he gave five talents, to another two, to still another one, to each one according to his own ability, and he went abroad.
16  Immediately the one that received the five talents went his way and did business with them and gained five more.
17  In the same way the one that received the two gained two more.
18  But the one that received just one went off, and dug in the ground and hid the silver money of his master.
19  “After a long time the master of those slaves came and settled accounts with them.
20  So the one that had received five talents came forward and brought five additional talents, saying, ‘Master, you committed five talents to me;  see, I gained five talents more.’
21  His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’
22  Next the one that had received the two talents came forward and said, ‘Master, you committed to me two talents;  see, I gained two talents more.’
23  His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful slave! You were faithful over a few things. I will appoint you over many things. Enter into the joy of your master.’
24  “Finally the one that had received the one talent came forward and said, ‘Master, I knew you to be an exacting man, reaping where you did not sow and gathering where you did not winnow.
25  So I grew afraid and went off and hid your talent in the ground. Here you have what is yours.’
26  In reply his master said to him, ‘Wicked and sluggish slave, you knew, did you, that I reaped where I did not sow and gathered where I did not winnow?
27  Well, then, you ought to have deposited my silver monies with the bankers, and on my arrival I would be receiving what is mine with interest.
28  “‘Therefore TAKE away the talent from him and give it to him that has the ten talents.
29  For to everyone that has, more will be given and he will have abundance;  but as for him that does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.
30  And throw the good-for-nothing slave out into the darkness outside. There is where [his] weeping and the gnashing of [his] teeth will be.’
31  “When the Son of man arrives in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit down on his glorious throne.
32  And all the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate people one from another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
33  And he will put the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on his left.
34  “Then the king will say to those on his right, ‘Come, YOU who have been blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for YOU from the founding of the world.
35  For I became hungry and YOU gave me something to eat;  I got thirsty and YOU gave me something to drink. I was a stranger and YOU received me hospitably; 
36  naked, and YOU clothed me. I fell sick and YOU looked after me. I was in prison and YOU came to me.’
37  Then the righteous ones will answer him with the words, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty, and give you something to drink?
38  When did we see you a stranger and receive you hospitably, or naked, and clothe you?
39  When did we see you sick or in prison and go to you?’
40  And in reply the king will say to them, ‘Truly I say to YOU, To the extent that YOU did it to one of the least of these my brothers, YOU did it to me.’
41  “Then he will say, in turn, to those on his left, ‘Be on YOUR way from me, YOU who have been cursed, into the everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels.
42  For I became hungry, but YOU gave me nothing to eat, and I got thirsty, but YOU gave me nothing to drink.
43  I was a stranger, but YOU did not receive me hospitably;  naked, but YOU did not clothe me;  sick and in prison, but YOU did not look after me.’
44  Then they also will answer with the words, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison and did not minister to you?’
45  Then he will answer them with the words, ‘Truly I say to YOU, To the extent that YOU did not do it to one of these least ones, YOU did not do it to me.’
46  And these will depart into everlasting cutting-off, but the righteous ones into everlasting life.”
matthew 26
26  Now when Jesus had finished all these sayings, he said to his disciples:
2  “YOU know that two days from now the passover occurs, and the Son of man is to be delivered up to be impaled.”
3  Then the chief priests and the older men of the people gathered together in the courtyard of the high priest who was called Caiaphas,
4  and took counsel together to seize Jesus by crafty device and kill him.
5  However, they kept saying: “Not at the festival, in order that no uproar may arise among the people.”
6  While Jesus happened to be in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper,
7  a woman with an alabaster case of costly perfumed oil approached him, and she began pouring it upon his head as he was reclining at the table.
8  On seeing this the disciples became indignant and said: “Why this waste?
9  For this could have been sold for a great deal and been given to poor people.”
10  Aware of this, Jesus said to them: “Why do YOU try to make trouble for the woman? For she did a fine deed toward me.
11  For YOU always have the poor with YOU, but YOU will not always have me.
12  For when this woman put this perfumed oil upon my body, she did it for the preparation of me for burial.
13  Truly I say to YOU, Wherever this good news is preached in all the world, what this woman did shall also be told as a remembrance of her.”
14  Then one of the twelve, the one called Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests
15  and said: “What will YOU give me to betray him to YOU?” They stipulated to him thirty silver pieces.
16  So from then on he kept seeking a good opportunity to betray him.
17  On the first day of the unfermented cakes the disciples came up to Jesus, saying: “Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the passover?”
18  He said: “Go into the city to So-and-so and say to him, The Teacher says, ‘My appointed time is near;  I will celebrate the passover with my disciples at your home.’”
19  And the disciples did as Jesus ordered them, and they got things ready for the passover.
20  When, now, it had become evening, he was reclining at the table with the twelve disciples.
21  While they were eating, he said: “Truly I say to YOU, One of YOU will betray me.”
22  Being very much grieved at this, they commenced each and every one to say to him: “Lord, it is not I, is it?”
23  In reply he said: “He that dips his hand with me in the bowl is the one that will betray me.
24  True, the Son of man is going away, just as it is written concerning him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of man is betrayed! It would have been finer for him if that man had not been born.”
25  By way of reply Judas, who was about to betray him, said: “It is not I, is it, Rabbi?” He said to him: “You yourself said [it].”
26  As they continued eating, Jesus took a loaf and, after saying a blessing, he broke it and, giving it to the disciples, he said: “TAKE, eat. This means my body.”
27  Also, he took a cup and, having given thanks, he gave it to them, saying: “Drink out of it, all of YOU; 
28  for this means my ‘blood of the covenant,’ which is to be poured out in behalf of many for forgiveness of sins.
29  But I tell YOU, I will by no means drink henceforth any of this product of the vine until that day when I drink it new with YOU in the kingdom of my Father.”
30  Finally, after singing praises, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
31  Then Jesus said to them: “All of YOU will be stumbled in connection with me on this night, for it is written, ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered about.’
32  But after I have been raised up, I will go ahead of YOU into Galilee.”
33  But Peter, in answer, said to him: “Although all the others are stumbled in connection with you, never will I be stumbled!”
34  Jesus said to him: “Truly I say to you, On this night, before a cock crows, you will disown me three times.”
35  Peter said to him: “Even if I should have to die with you, I will by no means disown you.” All the other disciples also said the same thing.
36  Then Jesus came with them to the spot called Gethsemane, and he said to the disciples: “Sit down here while I go over there and pray.”
37  And taking along Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he started to be grieved and to be sorely troubled.
38  Then he said to them: “My soul is deeply grieved, even to death. Stay here and keep on the watch with me.”
39  And going a little way forward, he fell upon his face, praying and saying: “My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass away from me. Yet, not as I will, but as you will.”
40  And he came to the disciples and found them sleeping, and he said to Peter: “Could YOU men not so much as watch one hour with me?
41  Keep on the watch and pray continually, that YOU may not enter into temptation. The spirit, of course, is eager, but the flesh is weak.”
42  Again, for the second time, he went off and prayed, saying: “My Father, if it is not possible for this to pass away except I drink it, let your will take place.”
43  And he came again and found them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy.
44  So leaving them, he again went off and prayed for the third time, saying once more the same word.
45  Then he came to the disciples and said to them: “At such a time as this YOU are sleeping and taking YOUR rest! Look! The hour has drawn near for the Son of man to be betrayed into the hands of sinners.
46  Get up, let us go. Look! My betrayer has drawn near.”
47  And while he was yet speaking, look! Judas, one of the twelve, came and with him a great crowd with swords and clubs from the chief priests and older men of the people.
48  Now his betrayer had given them a sign, saying: “Whoever it is I kiss, this is he;  take him into custody.”
49  And going straight up to Jesus he said: “Good day, Rabbi!” and kissed him very tenderly.
50  But Jesus said to him: “Fellow, for what purpose are you present?” Then they came forward and laid hands on Jesus and took him into custody.
51  But, look! one of those with Jesus reached out his hand and drew his sword and struck the slave of the high priest and took off his ear.
52  Then Jesus said to him: “Return your sword to its place, for all those who take the sword will perish by the sword.
53  Or do you think that I cannot appeal to my Father to supply me at this moment more than twelve legions of angels?
54  In that case, how would the Scriptures be fulfilled that it must take place this way?”
55  In that hour Jesus said to the crowds: “Have YOU come out with swords and clubs as against a robber to arrest me? Day after day I used to sit in the temple teaching, and yet YOU did not take me into custody.
56  But all this has taken place for the scriptures of the prophets to be fulfilled.” Then all the disciples abandoned him and fled.
57  Those who took Jesus into custody led him away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the older men were gathered together.
58  But Peter kept following him at a good distance, as far as the courtyard of the high priest, and, after going inside, he was sitting with the house attendants to see the outcome.
59  Meantime the chief priests and the entire Sanhedrin were looking for false witness against Jesus in order to put him to death,
60  but they found none, although many false witnesses came forward. Later on two came forward
61  and said: “This man said, ‘I am able to throw down the temple of God and build it up in three days.’”
62  With that the high priest stood up and said to him: “Have you no answer? What is it these are testifying against you?”
63  But Jesus kept silent. So the high priest said to him: “By the living God I put you under oath to tell us whether you are the Christ the Son of God!”
64  Jesus said to him: “You yourself said [it]. Yet I say to YOU men, From henceforth YOU will see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of power and coming on the clouds of heaven.”
65  Then the high priest ripped his outer garments, saying: “He has blasphemed! What further need do we have of witnesses? See! Now YOU have heard the blasphemy.
66  What is YOUR opinion?” They returned answer: “He is liable to death.”
67  Then they spit into his face and hit him with their fists. Others slapped him in the face,
68  saying: “Prophesy to us, you Christ. Who is it that struck you?”
69  Now Peter was sitting outside in the courtyard;  and a servant girl came up to him, saying: “You, too, were with Jesus the Galilean!”
70  But he denied it before them all, saying: “I do not know what you are talking about.”
71  After he had gone out to the gatehouse, another girl noticed him and said to those there: “This man was with Jesus the Nazarene.”
72  And again he denied it, with an oath: “I do not know the man!”
73  After a little while those standing around came up and said to Peter: “Certainly you also are one of them, for, in fact, your dialect gives you away.”
74  Then he started to curse and swear: “I do not know the man!” And immediately a cock crowed.
75  And Peter called to mind the saying Jesus spoke, namely: “Before a cock crows, you will disown me three times.” And he went outside and wept bitterly.
matthew 27
27  When it had become morning, all the chief priests and the older men of the people held a consultation against Jesus so as to put him to death.
2  And, after binding him, they led him off and handed him over to Pilate the governor.
3  Then Judas, who betrayed him, seeing he had been condemned, felt remorse and turned the thirty silver pieces back to the chief priests and older men,
4  saying: “I sinned when I betrayed righteous blood.” They said: “What is that to us? You must see to that!”
5  So he threw the silver pieces into the temple and withdrew, and went off and hanged himself.
6  But the chief priests took the silver pieces and said: “It is not lawful to drop them into the sacred treasury, because they are the price of blood.”
7  After consulting together, they bought with them the potter’s field to bury strangers.
8  Therefore that field has been called “Field of Blood” to this very day.
9  Then what was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled, saying: “And they took the thirty silver pieces, the price upon the man that was priced, the one on whom some of the sons of Israel set a price,
10  and they gave them for the potter’s field, according to what Jehovah had commanded me.”
11  Jesus now stood before the governor;  and the governor put the question to him: “Are you the king of the Jews?” Jesus replied: “You yourself say [it].”
12  But, while he was being accused by the chief priests and older men, he made no answer.
13  Then Pilate said to him: “Do you not hear how many things they are testifying against you?”
14  Yet he did not answer him, no, not a word, so that the governor wondered very much.
15  Now from festival to festival it was the custom of the governor to release a prisoner to the crowd, the one they wanted.
16  Just at that time they were holding a notorious prisoner called Barabbas.
17  Hence when they were gathered together Pilate said to them: “Which one do YOU want me to release to YOU, Barabbas or Jesus the so-called Christ?”
18  For he was aware that out of envy they had handed him over.
19  Moreover, while he was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent out to him, saying: “Have nothing to do with that righteous man, for I suffered a lot today in a dream because of him.”
20  But the chief priests and the older men persuaded the crowds to ask for Barabbas, but to have Jesus destroyed.
21  Now in responding the governor said to them: “Which of the two do YOU want me to release to YOU?” They said: “Barabbas.”
22  Pilate said to them: “What, then, shall I do with Jesus the so-called Christ?” They all said: “Let him be impaled!”
23  He said: “Why, what bad thing did he do?” Still they kept crying out all the more: “Let him be impaled!”
24  Seeing that it did no good but, rather, an uproar was arising, Pilate took water and washed his hands before the crowd, saying: “I am innocent of the blood of this [man]. YOU yourselves must see to it.”
25  At that all the people said in answer: “His blood come upon us and upon our children.”
26  Then he released Barabbas to them, but he had Jesus whipped and handed him over to be impaled.
27  Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the governor’s palace and gathered the whole body of troops together to him.
28  And disrobing him, they draped him with a scarlet cloak,
29  and they braided a crown out of thorns and put it on his head and a reed in his right hand. And, kneeling before him, they made fun of him, saying: “Good day, you King of the Jews!”
30  And they spit upon him and took the reed and began hitting him upon his head.
31  Finally, when they had made fun of him, they took the cloak off and put his outer garments upon him and led him off for impaling.
32  As they were going out they found a native of Cyrene named Simon. This man they impressed into service to lift up his torture stake.
33  And when they came to a place called Golgotha, that is to say, Skull Place,
34  they gave him wine mixed with gall to drink;  but, after tasting it, he refused to drink.
35  When they had impaled him they distributed his outer garments by casting lots,
36  and, as they sat, they watched over him there.
37  Also, they posted above his head the charge against him, in writing: “This is Jesus the King of the Jews.”
38  Then two robbers were impaled with him, one on his right and one on his left.
39  So the passersby began speaking abusively of him, wagging their heads
40  and saying: “O you would-be thrower-down of the temple and builder of it in three days, save yourself! If you are a son of God, come down off the torture stake!”
41  In like manner also the chief priests with the scribes and older men began making fun of him and saying:
42  “Others he saved;  himself he cannot save! He is King of Israel;  let him now come down off the torture stake and we will believe on him.
43  He has put his trust in God;  let Him now rescue him if He wants him, for he said, ‘I am God’s Son.’”
44  In the same way even the robbers that were impaled together with him began reproaching him.
45  From the sixth hour on a darkness fell over all the land, until the ninth hour.
46  About the ninth hour Jesus called out with a loud voice, saying: “Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?” that is, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”
47  At hearing this, some of those standing there began to say: “This man is calling Elijah.”
48  And immediately one of them ran and took a sponge and soaked it with sour wine and put it on a reed and went giving him a drink.
49  But the rest of them said: “Let him be! Let us see whether Elijah comes to save him.” [[Another man took a spear and pierced his side, and blood and water came out.]]
50  Again Jesus cried out with a loud voice, and yielded up [his] spirit.
51  And, look! the curtain of the sanctuary was rent in two, from top to bottom, and the earth quaked, and the rock-masses were split.
52  And the memorial tombs were opened and many bodies of the holy ones that had fallen asleep were raised up,
53  (and persons, coming out from among the memorial tombs after his being raised up, entered into the holy city,) and they became visible to many people.
54  But the army officer and those with him watching over Jesus, when they saw the earthquake and the things happening, grew very much afraid, saying: “Certainly this was God’s Son.”
55  Moreover, many women were there viewing from a distance, who had accompanied Jesus from Galilee to minister to him; 
56  among whom was Mary Magdalene, also Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
57  Now as it was late in the afternoon, there came a rich man of Arimathea, named Joseph, who had also himself become a disciple of Jesus.
58  This man went up to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded it to be given over.
59  And Joseph took the body, wrapped it up in clean fine linen,
60  and laid it in his new memorial tomb, which he had quarried in the rock-mass. And, after rolling a big stone to the door of the memorial tomb, he left.
61  But Mary Magdalene and the other Mary continued there, sitting before the grave.
62  The next day, which was after the Preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees gathered together before Pilate,
63  saying: “Sir, we have called to mind that that impostor said while yet alive, ‘After three days I am to be raised up.’
64  Therefore command the grave to be made secure until the third day, that his disciples may never come and steal him and say to the people, ‘He was raised up from the dead!’ and this last imposture will be worse than the first.”
65  Pilate said to them: “YOU have a guard. Go make it as secure as YOU know how.”
66  So they went and made the grave secure by sealing the stone and having the guard.
matthew 28
28  After the sabbath, when it was growing light on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to view the grave.
2  And, notice! a great earthquake had taken place;  for Jehovah’s angel had descended from heaven and approached and rolled away the stone, and was sitting on it.
3  His outward appearance was as lightning, and his clothing as white as snow.
4  Yes, for fear of him the watchmen trembled and became as dead men.
5  But the angel in answer said to the women: “Do not YOU be fearful, for I know YOU are looking for Jesus who was impaled.
6  He is not here, for he was raised up, as he said. Come, see the place where he was lying.
7  And go quickly and tell his disciples that he was raised up from the dead, and, look! he is going ahead of YOU into Galilee;  there YOU will see him. Look! I have told YOU.”
8  So, quickly leaving the memorial tomb, with fear and great joy, they ran to report to his disciples.
9  And, look! Jesus met them and said: “Good day!” They approached and caught him by his feet and did obeisance to him.
10  Then Jesus said to them: “Have no fear! Go, report to my brothers, that they may go off into Galilee;  and there they will see me.”
11  While they were on their way, look! some of the guard went into the city and reported to the chief priests all the things that had happened.
12  And after these had gathered together with the older men and taken counsel, they gave a sufficient number of silver pieces to the soldiers
13  and said: “Say, ‘His disciples came in the night and stole him while we were sleeping.’
14  And if this gets to the governor’s ears, we will persuade [him] and will set YOU free from worry.”
15  So they took the silver pieces and did as they were instructed;  and this saying has been spread abroad among the Jews up to this very day.
16  However, the eleven disciples went into Galilee to the mountain where Jesus had arranged for them,
17  and when they saw him they did obeisance, but some doubted.
18  And Jesus approached and spoke to them, saying: “All authority has been given me in heaven and on the earth.
19  Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit,
20  teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded YOU. And, look! I am with YOU all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.”
mark 1
1  [The] beginning of the good news about Jesus Christ:
2  Just as it is written in Isaiah the prophet: “(Look! I am sending forth my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way; )
3  listen! someone is crying out in the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way of Jehovah, YOU people, make his roads straight,’”
4  John the baptizer turned up in the wilderness, preaching baptism [in symbol] of repentance for forgiveness of sins.
5  Consequently all the territory of Judea and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem made their way out to him, and they were baptized by him in the Jordan River, openly confessing their sins.
6  Now John was clothed with camel’s hair and with a leather girdle around his loins, and was eating insect locusts and wild honey.
7  And he would preach, saying: “After me someone stronger than I am is coming;  I am not fit to stoop and untie the laces of his sandals.
8  I baptized YOU with water, but he will baptize YOU with holy spirit.”
9  In the course of those days Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee and was baptized in the Jordan by John.
10  And immediately on coming up out of the water he saw the heavens being parted, and, like a dove, the spirit coming down upon him; 
11  and a voice came out of the heavens: “You are my Son, the beloved;  I have approved you.”
12  And immediately the spirit impelled him to go into the wilderness.
13  So he continued in the wilderness forty days, being tempted by Satan, and he was with the wild beasts, but the angels were ministering to him.
14  Now after John was put under arrest Jesus went into Galilee, preaching the good news of God
15  and saying: “The appointed time has been fulfilled, and the kingdom of God has drawn near. Be repentant, YOU people, and have faith in the good news.”
16  While walking alongside the sea of Galilee he saw Simon and Andrew the brother of Simon casting [their nets] about in the sea, for they were fishers.
17  So Jesus said to them: “Come after me, and I shall cause YOU to become fishers of men.”
18  And at once they abandoned their nets and followed him.
19  And after going a little farther he saw James the [son] of Zebedee and John his brother, in fact, while they were in their boat mending their nets; 
20  and without delay he called them. In turn they left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired men and went off after him.
21  And they went their way into Capernaum. No sooner was it the sabbath than he entered into the synagogue and began to teach.
22  And they became astounded at his way of teaching, for there he was teaching them as one having authority, and not as the scribes.
23  Also, at that immediate time there was in their synagogue a man under the power of an unclean spirit, and he shouted,
24  saying: “What have we to do with you, Jesus you Nazarene? Did you come to destroy us? I know exactly who you are, the Holy One of God.”
25  But Jesus rebuked it, saying: “Be silent, and come on out of him!”
26  And the unclean spirit, after throwing him into a convulsion and yelling at the top of its voice, came on out of him.
27  Well, the people were all so astonished that they began a discussion among themselves, saying: “What is this? A new teaching! He authoritatively orders even the unclean spirits, and they obey him.”
28  So the report about him spread out immediately in all directions through all the country round about in Galilee.
29  And immediately they went out of the synagogue and went into the home of Simon and Andrew with James and John.
30  Now Simon’s mother-in-law was lying down sick with a fever, and they at once told him about her.
31  And going to her he raised her up, taking her by the hand;  and the fever left her, and she began ministering to them.
32  After evening had fallen, when the sun had set, the people began bringing him all those who were ill and those demon-possessed; 
33  and the whole city was gathered right at the door.
34  So he cured many that were ill with various sicknesses, and he expelled many demons, but he would not let the demons speak, because they knew him to be Christ.
35  And early in the morning, while it was still dark, he rose up and went outside and left for a lonely place, and there he began praying.
36  However, Simon and those with him hunted him down
37  and found him, and they said to him: “All are looking for you.”
38  But he said to them: “Let us go somewhere else, into the village towns nearby, that I may preach there also, for it is for this purpose I have gone out.”
39  And he did go, preaching in their synagogues throughout the whole of Galilee and expelling the demons.
40  There also came to him a leper, entreating him even on bended knee, saying to him: “If you just want to, you can make me clean.”
41  At that he was moved with pity, and he stretched out his hand and touched him, and said to him: “I want to. Be made clean.”
42  And immediately the leprosy vanished from him, and he became clean.
43  Furthermore, he gave him strict orders and at once sent him away,
44  and said to him: “See that you tell nobody a thing, but go show yourself to the priest and offer in behalf of your cleansing the things Moses directed, for a witness to them.”
45  But after going away the man started to proclaim it a great deal and to spread the account abroad, so that [Jesus] was no longer able to enter openly into a city, but he continued outside in lonely places. Yet they kept coming to him from all sides.
mark 2
2  However, after some days he again entered into Capernaum and he was reported to be at home.
2  Consequently many gathered, so much so that there was no more room, not even about the door, and he began to speak the word to them.
3  And men came bringing him a paralytic carried by four.
4  But not being able to bring him right to [Jesus] on account of the crowd, they removed the roof over where he was, and having dug an opening they lowered the cot on which the paralytic was lying.
5  And when Jesus saw their faith he said to the paralytic: “Child, your sins are forgiven.”
6  Now there were some of the scribes there, sitting and reasoning in their hearts:
7  “Why is this man talking in this manner? He is blaspheming. Who can forgive sins except one, God?”
8  But Jesus, having discerned immediately by his spirit that they were reasoning that way in themselves, said to them: “Why are YOU reasoning these things in YOUR hearts?
9  Which is easier, to say to the paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and pick up your cot and walk’?
10  But in order for YOU men to know that the Son of man has authority to forgive sins upon the earth,”—he said to the paralytic:
11  “I say to you, Get up, pick up your cot, and go to your home.”
12  At that he did get up, and immediately picked up his cot and walked out in front of them all, so that they were all simply carried away, and they glorified God, saying: “We never saw the like of it.”
13  Again he went out beside the sea;  and all the crowd kept coming to him, and he began to teach them.
14  But as he was passing along, he caught sight of Levi the [son] of Alphaeus sitting at the tax office, and he said to him: “Be my follower.” And rising up he followed him.
15  Later he happened to be reclining at the table in his house, and many tax collectors and sinners were reclining with Jesus and his disciples, for there were many of them and they began following him.
16  But the scribes of the Pharisees, when they saw he was eating with the sinners and tax collectors, began saying to his disciples: “Does he eat with the tax collectors and sinners?”
17  Upon hearing this Jesus said to them: “Those who are strong do not need a physician, but those who are ill do. I came to call, not righteous people, but sinners.”
18  Now John’s disciples and the Pharisees practiced fasting. So they came and said to him: “Why is it the disciples of John and the disciples of the Pharisees practice fasting, but your disciples do not practice fasting?”
19  And Jesus said to them: “While the bridegroom is with them the friends of the bridegroom cannot fast, can they? As long as they have the bridegroom with them they cannot fast.
20  But days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast in that day.
21  Nobody sews a patch of unshrunk cloth upon an old outer garment;  if he does, its full strength pulls from it, the new from the old, and the tear becomes worse.
22  Also, nobody puts new wine into old wineskins;  if he does, the wine bursts the skins, and the wine is lost as well as the skins. But people put new wine into new wineskins.”
23  Now it happened that he was proceeding through the grainfields on the sabbath, and his disciples started to make their way plucking the heads of grain.
24  So the Pharisees went saying to him: “Look here! Why are they doing on the sabbath what is not lawful?”
25  But he said to them: “Have YOU never once read what David did when he fell in need and got hungry, he and the men with him?
26  How he entered into the house of God, in the account about Abiathar the chief priest, and ate the loaves of presentation, which it is not lawful for anybody to eat except the priests, and he gave some also to the men who were with him?”
27  So he went on to say to them: “The sabbath came into existence for the sake of man, and not man for the sake of the sabbath; 
28  hence the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath.”
mark 3
3  Once again he entered into a synagogue, and a man was there with a dried-up hand.
2  So they were watching him closely to see whether he would cure the man on the sabbath, in order that they might accuse him.
3  And he said to the man with the withered hand: “Get up [and come] to the center.”
4  Next he said to them: “Is it lawful on the sabbath to do a good deed or to do a bad deed, to save or to kill a soul?” But they kept silent.
5  And after looking around upon them with indignation, being thoroughly grieved at the insensibility of their hearts, he said to the man: “Stretch out your hand.” And he stretched it out, and his hand was restored.
6  At that the Pharisees went out and immediately began holding council with the party followers of Herod against him, in order to destroy him.
7  But Jesus with his disciples withdrew to the sea;  and a great multitude from Galilee and from Judea followed him.
8  Even from Jerusalem and from Idumea and from across the Jordan and around Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, on hearing of how many things he was doing, came to him.
9  And he told his disciples to have a little boat continually at his service so that the crowd might not press upon him.
10  For he cured many, with the result that all those who had grievous diseases were falling upon him to touch him.
11  Even the unclean spirits, whenever they would behold him, would prostrate themselves before him and cry out, saying: “You are the Son of God.”
12  But many times he sternly charged them not to make him known.
13  And he ascended a mountain and summoned those he wanted, and they went off to him.
14  And he formed [a group of] twelve, whom he also named “apostles,” that they might continue with him and that he might send them out to preach
15  and to have authority to expel the demons.
16  And the [group of] twelve that he formed were Simon, to whom he also gave the surname Peter,
17  and James the [son] of Zebedee and John the brother of James (he also gave these the surname Boanerges, which means Sons of Thunder),
18  and Andrew and Philip and Bartholomew and Matthew and Thomas and James the [son] of Alphaeus and Thaddaeus and Simon the Cananaean
19  and Judas Iscariot, who later betrayed him. And he went into a house.
20  Once more the crowd gathered, so that they were not able even to eat a meal.
21  But when his relatives heard about it, they went out to lay hold of him, for they were saying: “He has gone out of his mind.”
22  Also, the scribes that came down from Jerusalem were saying: “He has Beelzebub, and he expels the demons by means of the ruler of the demons.”
23  So, after calling them to him, he began to say to them with illustrations: “How can Satan expel Satan?
24  Why, if a kingdom becomes divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand; 
25  and if a house becomes divided against itself, that house will not be able to stand.
26  Also, if Satan has risen up against himself and become divided, he cannot stand, but is coming to an end.
27  In fact, no one that has got into the house of a strong man is able to plunder his movable goods unless first he binds the strong man, and then he will plunder his house.
28  Truly I say to YOU that all things will be forgiven the sons of men, no matter what sins and blasphemies they blasphemously commit.
29  However, whoever blasphemes against the holy spirit has no forgiveness forever, but is guilty of everlasting sin.”
30  This, because they were saying: “He has an unclean spirit.”
31  Now his mother and his brothers came, and, as they were standing on the outside, they sent in to him to call him.
32  As it was, a crowd was sitting around him, so they said to him: “Look! Your mother and your brothers outside are seeking you.”
33  But in reply he said to them: “Who are my mother and my brothers?”
34  And having looked about upon those sitting around him in a circle, he said: “See, my mother and my brothers!
35  Whoever does the will of God, this one is my brother and sister and mother.”
mark 4
4  And he again started teaching beside the sea. And a very great crowd gathered near him, so that he went aboard a boat and sat out on the sea, but all the crowd beside the sea were on the shore.
2  So he began to teach them many things with illustrations and to say to them in his teaching:
3  “Listen. Look! The sower went out to sow.
4  And as he was sowing, some [seed] fell alongside the road, and the birds came and ate it up.
5  And other [seed] fell upon the rocky place where it, of course, did not have much soil, and it immediately sprang up because of not having depth of soil.
6  But when the sun rose, it was scorched, and for not having root it withered.
7  And other [seed] fell among the thorns, and the thorns came up and choked it, and it yielded no fruit.
8  But others fell upon the fine soil, and, coming up and increasing, they began to yield fruit, and they were bearing thirtyfold, and sixty and a hundred.”
9  So he added the word: “Let him that has ears to listen listen.”
10  Now when he got to be alone, those around him with the twelve began questioning him on the illustrations.
11  And he proceeded to say to them: “To YOU the sacred secret of the kingdom of God has been given, but to those outside all things occur in illustrations,
12  in order that, though looking, they may look and yet not see, and, though hearing, they may hear and yet not get the sense of it, nor ever turn back and forgiveness be given them.”
13  Further, he said to them: “YOU do not know this illustration, and so how will YOU understand all the other illustrations?
14  “The sower sows the word.
15  These, then, are the ones alongside the road where the word is sown;  but as soon as they have heard [it] Satan comes and takes away the word that was sown in them.
16  And likewise these are the ones sown upon the rocky places: as soon as they have heard the word, they accept it with joy.
17  Yet they have no root in themselves, but they continue for a time;  then as soon as tribulation or persecution arises because of the word, they are stumbled.
18  There are still others who are sown among the thorns;  these are the ones that have heard the word,
19  but the anxieties of this system of things and the deceptive power of riches and the desires for the rest of the things make inroads and choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
20  Finally, the ones that were sown on the fine soil are those who listen to the word and favorably receive it and bear fruit thirtyfold and sixty and a hundred.”
21  And he went on to say to them: “A lamp is not brought to be put under a measuring basket or under a bed, is it? It is brought to be put upon a lampstand, is it not?
22  For there is nothing hidden except for the purpose of being exposed;  nothing has become carefully concealed but for the purpose of coming into the open.
23  Whoever has ears to listen, let him listen.”
24  He further said to them: “Pay attention to what YOU are hearing. With the measure that YOU are measuring out, YOU will have it measured out to YOU, yes, YOU will have more added to YOU.
25  For he that has will have more given to him;  but he that does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.”
26  So he went on to say: “In this way the kingdom of God is just as when a man casts the seed upon the ground,
27  and he sleeps at night and rises up by day, and the seed sprouts and grows tall, just how he does not know.
28  Of its own self the ground bears fruit gradually, first the grass-blade, then the stalk head, finally the full grain in the head.
29  But as soon as the fruit permits it, he thrusts in the sickle, because the harvesttime has come.”
30  And he went on to say: “With what are we to liken the kingdom of God, or in what illustration shall we set it out?
31  Like a mustard grain, which at the time it was sown in the ground was the tiniest of all the seeds that are on the earth—
32  but when it has been sown, it comes up and becomes greater than all other vegetables and produces great branches, so that the birds of the heaven are able to find lodging under its shadow.”
33  So with many illustrations of that sort he would speak the word to them, as far as they were able to listen.
34  Indeed, without an illustration he would not speak to them, but privately to his disciples he would explain all things.
35  And on that day, when evening had fallen, he said to them: “Let us cross to the other shore.”
36  So, after they had dismissed the crowd, they took him in the boat, just as he was, and there were other boats with him.
37  Now a great violent windstorm broke out, and the waves kept dashing into the boat, so that the boat was close to being swamped.
38  But he was in the stern, sleeping upon a pillow. So they woke him up and said to him: “Teacher, do you not care that we are about to perish?”
39  With that he roused himself and rebuked the wind and said to the sea: “Hush! Be quiet!” And the wind abated, and a great calm set in.
40  So he said to them: “Why are YOU fainthearted? Do YOU not yet have any faith?”
41  But they felt an unusual fear, and they would say to one another: “Who really is this, because even the wind and the sea obey him?”
mark 5
5  Well, they got to the other side of the sea into the country of the Gerasenes.
2  And immediately after he got out of the boat a man under the power of an unclean spirit met him from among the memorial tombs.
3  He had his haunt among the tombs;  and up to that time absolutely nobody was able to bind him fast even with a chain,
4  because he had oftentimes been bound with fetters and chains, but the chains were snapped apart by him and the fetters were actually smashed;  and nobody had the strength to subdue him.
5  And continually, night and day, he was crying out in the tombs and in the mountains and slashing himself with stones.
6  But on catching sight of Jesus from a distance he ran and did obeisance to him,
7  and, when he had cried out with a loud voice, he said: “What have I to do with you, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I put you under oath by God not to torment me.”
8  For he had been telling it: “Come out of the man, you unclean spirit.”
9  But he began to ask him: “What is your name?” And he said to him: “My name is Legion, because there are many of us.”
10  And he entreated him many times not to send the spirits out of the country.
11  Now a great herd of swine was there at the mountain feeding.
12  So they entreated him, saying: “Send us into the swine, that we may enter into them.”
13  And he permitted them. With that the unclean spirits came out and entered into the swine;  and the herd rushed over the precipice into the sea, about two thousand of them, and they drowned one after another in the sea.
14  But the herders of them fled and reported it in the city and in the countryside;  and people came to see what it was that had happened.
15  So they came to Jesus, and they beheld the demon-possessed [man] sitting clothed and in his sound mind, this [man] that had had the legion;  and they grew fearful.
16  Also, those who had seen it related to them how this had happened to the demon-possessed [man] and about the swine.
17  And so they started to entreat him to go away from their districts.
18  Now as he was boarding the boat, the [man] that had been demon-possessed began entreating him that he might continue with him.
19  However, he did not let him, but said to him: “Go home to your relatives, and report to them all the things Jehovah has done for you and the mercy he had on you.”
20  And he went away and started to proclaim in the Decapolis all the things Jesus did for him, and all the people began to wonder.
21  After Jesus had crossed back again in the boat to the opposite shore a great crowd gathered together to him;  and he was beside the sea.
22  Now one of the presiding officers of the synagogue, Jairus by name, came and, on catching sight of him, he fell at his feet
23  and entreated him many times, saying: “My little daughter is in an extreme condition. Would you please come and put your hands upon her that she may get well and live.”
24  At that he went off with him. And a great crowd was following him and pressing against him.
25  Now there was a woman subject to a flow of blood twelve years,
26  and she had been put to many pains by many physicians and had spent all her resources and had not been benefited but, rather, had got worse.
27  When she heard the things about Jesus, she came behind in the crowd and touched his outer garment; 
28  for she kept saying: “If I touch just his outer garments I shall get well.”
29  And immediately her fountain of blood dried up, and she sensed in her body that she had been healed of the grievous sickness.
30  Immediately, also, Jesus recognized in himself that power had gone out of him, and he turned about in the crowd and began to say: “Who touched my outer garments?”
31  But his disciples began to say to him: “You see the crowd pressing in upon you, and do you say, ‘Who touched me?’”
32  However, he was looking around to see her that had done this.
33  But the woman, frightened and trembling, knowing what had happened to her, came and fell down before him and told him the whole truth.
34  He said to her: “Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace, and be in good health from your grievous sickness.”
35  While he was yet speaking, some men from the home of the presiding officer of the synagogue came and said: “Your daughter died! Why bother the teacher any longer?”
36  But Jesus, overhearing the word being spoken, said to the presiding officer of the synagogue: “Have no fear, only exercise faith.”
37  Now he did not let anyone follow along with him except Peter and James and John the brother of James.
38  So they came to the house of the presiding officer of the synagogue, and he beheld the noisy confusion and those weeping and letting out many wails,
39  and, after stepping in, he said to them: “Why are YOU causing noisy confusion and weeping? The young child has not died, but is sleeping.”
40  At this they began to laugh scornfully at him. But, having put them all out, he took along the young child’s father and mother and those with him, and he went in where the young child was.
41  And, taking the hand of the young child, he said to her: “Talitha cumi,” which, translated, means: “Maiden, I say to you, Get up!”
42  And immediately the maiden rose and began walking, for she was twelve years old. And at once they were beside themselves with great ecstasy.
43  But he ordered them again and again to let no one learn of this, and he said that something should be given her to eat.
mark 6
6  And he departed from there and came into his home territory, and his disciples followed him.
2  When it became sabbath, he started teaching in the synagogue;  and the greater number of those listening were astounded and said: “Where did this man get these things? And why should this wisdom have been given this man, and such powerful works be performed through his hands?
3  This is the carpenter the son of Mary and the brother of James and Joseph and Judas and Simon, is it not? And his sisters are here with us, are they not?” So they began to stumble at him.
4  But Jesus went on to say to them: “A prophet is not unhonored except in his home territory and among his relatives and in his own house.”
5  So he was able to do no powerful work there except to lay his hands upon a few sickly ones and cure them.
6  Indeed, he wondered at their lack of faith. And he went round about to the villages in a circuit, teaching.
7  Now he summoned the twelve, and he initiated sending them out two by two, and he began to give them authority over the unclean spirits.
8  Also, he gave them orders to carry nothing for the trip except a staff alone, no bread, no food pouch, no copper money in their girdle purses,
9  but to bind on sandals, and not to wear two undergarments.
10  Further, he said to them: “Wherever YOU enter into a home, stay there until YOU go out of that place.
11  And wherever a place will not receive YOU nor hear YOU, on going out from there shake off the dirt that is beneath YOUR feet for a witness to them.”
12  So they set out and preached in order that people might repent; 
13  and they would expel many demons and grease many sickly people with oil and cure them.
14  Now it got to the ears of King Herod, for the name of [Jesus] became public, and people were saying: “John the baptizer has been raised from the dead, and on that account the powerful works are operating in him.”
15  But others were saying: “It is Elijah.” Still others were saying: “It is a prophet like one of the prophets.”
16  But when Herod heard it he began to say: “The John that I beheaded, this one has been raised up.”
17  For Herod himself had sent out and arrested John and bound him in prison on account of Herodias the wife of Philip his brother, because he had married her.
18  For John had repeatedly said to Herod: “It is not lawful for you to be having the wife of your brother.”
19  But Herodias was nursing a grudge against him and was wanting to kill him, but could not.
20  For Herod stood in fear of John, knowing him to be a righteous and holy man;  and he was keeping him safe. And after hearing him he was at a great loss what to do, yet he continued to hear him gladly.
21  But a convenient day came along when Herod spread an evening meal on his birthday for his top-ranking men and the military commanders and the foremost ones of Galilee.
22  And the daughter of this very Herodias came in and danced and pleased Herod and those reclining with him. The king said to the maiden: “Ask me for whatever you want, and I will give it to you.”
23  Yes, he swore to her: “Whatever you ask me for, I will give it to you, up to half my kingdom.”
24  And she went out and said to her mother: “What should I ask for?” She said: “The head of John the baptizer.”
25  Immediately she went in with haste to the king and made her request, saying: “I want you to give me right away on a platter the head of John the Baptist.”
26  Although he became deeply grieved, yet the king did not want to disregard her, in view of the oaths and those reclining at the table.
27  So the king immediately dispatched a body guardsman and commanded him to bring his head. And he went off and beheaded him in the prison
28  and brought his head on a platter, and he gave it to the maiden, and the maiden gave it to her mother.
29  When his disciples heard of it they came and took up his corpse and laid it in a memorial tomb.
30  And the apostles gathered together before Jesus and reported to him all the things they had done and taught.
31  And he said to them: “Come, YOU yourselves, privately into a lonely place and rest up a bit.” For there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure time even to eat a meal.
32  So off they went in the boat for a lonely place to themselves.
33  But people saw them going and many got to know it, and from all the cities they ran there together on foot and got ahead of them.
34  Well, on getting out, he saw a great crowd, but he was moved with pity for them, because they were as sheep without a shepherd. And he started to teach them many things.
35  By now the hour had grown late, and his disciples came up to him and began to say: “The place is isolated, and the hour is already late.
36  Send them away, that they may go off into the countryside and villages round about and buy themselves something to eat.”
37  In reply he said to them: “YOU give them something to eat.” At this they said to him: “Shall we go off and buy two hundred denarii worth of loaves and give [them] to the people to eat?”
38  He said to them: “How many loaves have YOU? Go see!” After ascertaining it, they said: “Five, besides two fishes.”
39  And he instructed all the people to recline by companies on the green grass.
40  And they laid themselves down in groups of a hundred and of fifty.
41  Taking now the five loaves and the two fishes he looked up to heaven and said a blessing, and broke the loaves up and began giving them to the disciples, that these might place them before the people;  and he divided up the two fishes for all.
42  So they all ate and were satisfied; 
43  and they took up fragments, twelve baskets full, aside from the fishes.
44  Furthermore, those who ate of the loaves were five thousand men.
45  And, without delay, he compelled his disciples to board the boat and go on ahead to the opposite shore toward Bethsaida, while he himself dismissed the crowd.
46  But after saying good-bye to them he went off into a mountain to pray.
47  Evening having now fallen, the boat was in the midst of the sea, but he was alone on the land.
48  And when he saw them being hard put to it in their rowing, for the wind was against them, about the fourth watch of the night he came toward them, walking on the sea;  but he was inclined to pass them by.
49  At catching sight of him walking on the sea they thought: “It is an apparition!” and they cried aloud.
50  For they all saw him and were troubled. But immediately he spoke with them, and he said to them: “Take courage, it is I;  have no fear.”
51  And he got up into the boat with them, and the wind abated. At this they were very much amazed within themselves,
52  for they had not grasped the meaning of the loaves, but their hearts continued dull of understanding.
53  And when they got across to land, they came into Gennesaret and anchored ship nearby.
54  But as soon as they got out of the boat, people recognized him,
55  and they ran around all that region and started to carry about on cots those who were ailing to where they heard he was.
56  And wherever he would enter into villages or cities or countryside they would place the sick ones in the marketplaces, and they would plead with him that they might touch just the fringe of his outer garment. And as many as did touch it were made well.
mark 7
7  Now the Pharisees and some of the scribes that had come from Jerusalem gathered about him.
2  And when they saw some of his disciples eat their meal with defiled hands, that is, unwashed ones—
3  for the Pharisees and all the Jews do not eat unless they wash their hands up to the elbow, holding fast the tradition of the men of former times,
4  and, when back from market, they do not eat unless they cleanse themselves by sprinkling;  and there are many other traditions that they have received to hold fast, baptisms of cups and pitchers and copper vessels; —
5  so these Pharisees and scribes asked him: “Why is it your disciples do not conduct themselves according to the tradition of the men of former times, but they take their meal with defiled hands?”
6  He said to them: “Isaiah aptly prophesied about YOU hypocrites, as it is written, ‘This people honor me with [their] lips, but their hearts are far removed from me.
7  It is in vain that they keep worshiping me, because they teach as doctrines commands of men.’
8  Letting go the commandment of God, YOU hold fast the tradition of men.”
9  Further, he went on to say to them: “Adroitly YOU set aside the commandment of God in order to retain YOUR tradition.
10  For example, Moses said, ‘Honor your father and your mother,’ and, ‘Let him that reviles father or mother end up in death.’
11  But YOU men say, ‘If a man says to his father or his mother: “Whatever I have by which you may get benefit from me is corban, (that is, a gift dedicated to God,)”’—
12  YOU men no longer let him do a single thing for his father or his mother,
13  and thus YOU make the word of God invalid by YOUR tradition which YOU handed down. And many things similar to this YOU do.”
14  So, calling the crowd to him again, he proceeded to say to them: “Listen to me, all of YOU, and get the meaning.
15  There is nothing from outside a man that passes into him that can defile him;  but the things that issue forth out of a man are the things that defile a man.”
16  ——
17  Now when he had entered a house away from the crowd, his disciples began to question him respecting the illustration.
18  So he said to them: “Are YOU also without perception like them? Are YOU not aware that nothing from outside that passes into a man can defile him,
19  since it passes, not into [his] heart, but into [his] intestines, and it passes out into the sewer?” Thus he declared all foods clean.
20  Further, he said: “That which issues forth out of a man is what defiles a man; 
21  for from inside, out of the heart of men, injurious reasonings issue forth: fornications, thieveries, murders,
22  adulteries, covetings, acts of wickedness, deceit, loose conduct, an envious eye, blasphemy, haughtiness, unreasonableness.
23  All these wicked things issue forth from within and defile a man.”
24  From there he rose up and went into the regions of Tyre and Sidon. And he entered into a house and did not want anyone to get to know it. Yet he could not escape notice; 
25  but immediately a woman whose little daughter had an unclean spirit heard about him and came and prostrated herself at his feet.
26  The woman was a Grecian, a Syrophoenician nationally;  and she kept asking him to expel the demon from her daughter.
27  But he began by saying to her: “First let the children be satisfied, for it is not right to take the bread of the children and throw it to the little dogs.”
28  In reply, however, she said to him: “Yes, sir, and yet the little dogs underneath the table eat of the crumbs of the little children.”
29  At that he said to her: “Because of saying this, go;  the demon has gone out of your daughter.”
30  So she went away to her home and found the young child laid on the bed and the demon gone out.
31  Now coming back out of the regions of Tyre he went through Sidon to the sea of Galilee up through the midst of the regions of Decapolis.
32  Here they brought him a man deaf and with a speech impediment, and they entreated him to lay his hand upon him.
33  And he took him away from the crowd privately and put his fingers into the man’s ears and, after spitting, he touched his tongue.
34  And with a look up into heaven he sighed deeply and said to him: “Ephphatha,” that is, “Be opened.”
35  Well, his hearing powers were opened, and the impediment of his tongue was loosed, and he began speaking normally.
36  With that he charged them not to tell anyone;  but the more he would charge them, that much more they would proclaim it.
37  Indeed, they were being astounded in a most extraordinary way and they said: “He has done all things well. He even makes the deaf hear and the speechless speak.”
mark 8
8  In those days, when there was again a big crowd and they had nothing to eat, he summoned the disciples and said to them:
2  “I feel pity for the crowd, because it is already three days that they have remained near me and they have nothing to eat; 
3  and if I should send them off to their homes fasting, they will give out on the road. Indeed, some of them are from far away.”
4  But his disciples answered him: “From where will anybody here in an isolated place be able to satisfy these people with loaves?”
5  Still he went on to ask them: “How many loaves have YOU?” They said: “Seven.”
6  And he instructed the crowd to recline on the ground, and he took the seven loaves, gave thanks, broke them, and began to give them to his disciples to serve, and they served them to the crowd.
7  They also had a few little fishes;  and, having blessed these, he told them also to serve these.
8  Accordingly they ate and were satisfied, and they took up surpluses of fragments, seven provision baskets full.
9  Yet there were about four thousand [men]. Finally he sent them away.
10  And immediately he boarded the boat with his disciples and came into the parts of Dalmanutha.
11  Here the Pharisees came out and started disputing with him, seeking from him a sign from heaven, to put him to the test.
12  So he groaned deeply with his spirit, and said: “Why does this generation seek a sign? Truly I say, No sign will be given to this generation.”
13  With that he left them, got aboard again, and went off to the opposite shore.
14  As it was, they forgot to take loaves along, and except for one loaf they had nothing with them in the boat.
15  And he began to order them expressly and say: “Keep YOUR eyes open, look out for the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.”
16  So they went arguing with one another over the fact that they had no loaves.
17  Noting this, he said to them: “Why do YOU argue over your having no loaves? Do YOU not yet perceive and get the meaning? Do YOU have YOUR hearts dull of understanding?
18  ‘Though having eyes, do YOU not see;  and though having ears, do YOU not hear?’ And do YOU not remember,
19  when I broke the five loaves for the five thousand [men], how many baskets full of fragments YOU took up?” They said to him: “Twelve.”
20  “When I broke the seven for the four thousand [men], how many provision baskets full of fragments did YOU take up?” And they said to him: “Seven.”
21  With that he said to them: “Do YOU not yet get the meaning?”
22  Now they put in at Bethsaida. Here people brought him a blind man, and they entreated him to touch him.
23  And he took the blind man by the hand, brought him outside the village, and, having spit upon his eyes, he laid his hands upon him and began to ask him: “Do you see anything?”
24  And the man looked up and began saying: “I see men, because I observe what seem to be trees, but they are walking about.”
25  Then he laid his hands again upon the man’s eyes, and the man saw clearly, and he was restored, and he was seeing everything distinctly.
26  So he sent him off home, saying: “But do not enter into the village.”
27  Jesus and his disciples now left for the villages of Caesarea Philippi, and on the way he began questioning his disciples, saying to them: “Who are men saying that I am?”
28  They said to him: “John the Baptist, and others, Elijah, still others, One of the prophets.”
29  And he put the question to them: “YOU, though, who do YOU say I am?” In answer Peter said to him: “You are the Christ.”
30  At that he strictly charged them not to tell anyone about him.
31  Also, he started teaching them that the Son of man must undergo many sufferings and be rejected by the older men and the chief priests and the scribes and be killed, and rise three days later.
32  Indeed, with outspokenness he was making that statement. But Peter took him aside and started rebuking him.
33  He turned, looked at his disciples and rebuked Peter, and said: “Get behind me, Satan, because you think, not God’s thoughts, but those of men.”
34  He now called the crowd to him with his disciples and said to them: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake and follow me continually.
35  For whoever wants to save his soul will lose it;  but whoever loses his soul for the sake of me and the good news will save it.
36  Really, of what benefit is it for a man to gain the whole world and to forfeit his soul?
37  What, really, would a man give in exchange for his soul?
38  For whoever becomes ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of man will also be ashamed of him when he arrives in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.”
mark 9
9  Furthermore, he went on to say to them: “Truly I say to YOU, There are some of those standing here that will not taste death at all until first they see the kingdom of God already come in power.”
2  Accordingly six days later Jesus took Peter and James and John along, and brought them up into a lofty mountain to themselves alone. And he was transfigured before them,
3  and his outer garments became glistening, far whiter than any clothes cleaner on earth could whiten them.
4  Also, Elijah with Moses appeared to them, and they were conversing with Jesus.
5  And responsively Peter said to Jesus: “Rabbi, it is fine for us to be here, so let us erect three tents, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah.”
6  In fact, he did not know what response he should make, for they became quite fearful.
7  And a cloud formed, overshadowing them, and a voice came out of the cloud: “This is my Son, the beloved;  listen to him.”
8  Suddenly, however, they looked around and saw no one with them any longer, except Jesus alone.
9  As they were coming down out of the mountain, he expressly ordered them not to relate to anybody what they saw, until after the Son of man had risen from the dead.
10  And they took the word to heart, but discussed among themselves what this rising from the dead meant.
11  And they began to question him, saying: “Why do the scribes say that first Elijah must come?”
12  He said to them: “Elijah does come first and restore all things;  but how is it that it is written respecting the Son of man that he must undergo many sufferings and be treated as of no account?
13  But I say to YOU, Elijah, in fact, has come, and they did to him as many things as they wanted, just as it is written respecting him.”
14  When, now, they came toward the other disciples, they noticed a great crowd about them and scribes disputing with them.
15  But as soon as all the crowd caught sight of him they were stunned, and, running up to him, they began to greet him.
16  And he asked them: “What are YOU disputing with them?”
17  And one of the crowd answered him: “Teacher, I brought my son to you because he has a speechless spirit; 
18  and wherever it seizes him it dashes him to the ground, and he foams and grinds his teeth and loses his strength. And I told your disciples to expel it, but they were not capable.”
19  In response he said to them: “O faithless generation, how long must I continue with YOU? How long must I put up with YOU? Bring him to me.”
20  So they brought him to him. But at the sight of him the spirit at once threw [the child] into convulsions, and after falling on the ground he kept rolling about, foaming.
21  And he asked his father: “How long has this been happening to him?” He said: “From childhood on; 
22  and time and again it would throw him both into the fire and into the water to destroy him. But if you can do anything, have pity on us and help us.”
23  Jesus said to him: “That expression, ‘If you can’! Why, all things can be to one if one has faith.”
24  Immediately crying out, the father of the young child was saying: “I have faith! Help me out where I need faith!”
25  Jesus, now noticing that a crowd was running together upon [them], rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to it: “You speechless and deaf spirit, I order you, get out of him and enter into him no more.”
26  And after crying out and going through many convulsions it got out;  and he became as dead, so that the greater number of them were saying: “He is dead!”
27  But Jesus took him by the hand and raised him up, and he rose.
28  So after he entered into a house his disciples proceeded to ask him privately: “Why could we not expel it?”
29  And he said to them: “This kind cannot get out by anything except by prayer.”
30  From there they departed and went their way through Galilee, but he did not want anyone to get to know it.
31  For he was teaching his disciples and telling them: “The Son of man is to be delivered into men’s hands, and they will kill him, but, despite being killed, he will rise three days later.”
32  However, they were not understanding the saying, and they were afraid to question him.
33  And they came into Capernaum. Now when he was inside the house he put the question to them: “What were YOU arguing over on the road?”
34  They kept silent, for on the road they had argued among themselves who is greater.
35  So he sat down and called the twelve and said to them: “If anyone wants to be first, he must be last of all and minister of all.”
36  And he took a young child, stood it in their midst and put his arms around it and said to them:
37  “Whoever receives one of such young children on the basis of my name, receives me;  and whoever receives me, receives, not me only, but also him that sent me forth.”
38  John said to him: “Teacher, we saw a certain man expelling demons by the use of your name and we tried to prevent him, because he was not accompanying us.”
39  But Jesus said: “Do not try to prevent him, for there is no one that will do a powerful work on the basis of my name that will quickly be able to revile me; 
40  for he that is not against us is for us.
41  For whoever gives YOU a cup of water to drink on the ground that YOU belong to Christ, I truly tell YOU, he will by no means lose his reward.
42  But whoever stumbles one of these little ones that believe, it would be finer for him if a millstone such as is turned by an ass were put around his neck and he were actually pitched into the sea.
43  “And if ever your hand makes you stumble, cut it off;  it is finer for you to enter into life maimed than with two hands to go off into Gehenna, into the fire that cannot be put out.
44  ——
45  And if your foot makes you stumble, cut it off;  it is finer for you to enter into life lame than with two feet to be pitched into Gehenna.
46  ——
47  And if your eye makes you stumble, throw it away;  it is finer for you to enter one-eyed into the kingdom of God than with two eyes to be pitched into Gehenna,
48  where their maggot does not die and the fire is not put out.
49  “For everyone must be salted with fire.
50  Salt is fine;  but if ever the salt loses its strength, with what will YOU season it itself? Have salt in yourselves, and keep peace between one another.”
mark 10
10  From there he rose and came to the frontiers of Judea and across the Jordan, and again crowds came together to him, and as he was accustomed to do he again went teaching them.
2  Pharisees now approached and, to put him to the test, began questioning him whether it was lawful for a man to divorce a wife.
3  In answer he said to them: “What did Moses command YOU?”
4  They said: “Moses allowed the writing of a certificate of dismissal and divorcing [her].”
5  But Jesus said to them: “Out of regard for YOUR hardheartedness he wrote YOU this commandment.
6  However, from [the] beginning of creation ‘He made them male and female.
7  On this account a man will leave his father and mother,
8  and the two will be one flesh’;  so that they are no longer two, but one flesh.
9  Therefore what God yoked together let no man put apart.”
10  When again in the house the disciples began to question him concerning this.
11  And he said to them: “Whoever divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery against her,
12  and if ever a woman, after divorcing her husband, marries another, she commits adultery.”
13  Now people began bringing him young children for him to touch these;  but the disciples reprimanded them.
14  At seeing this Jesus was indignant and said to them: “Let the young children come to me;  do not try to stop them, for the kingdom of God belongs to suchlike ones.
15  Truly I say to YOU, Whoever does not receive the kingdom of God like a young child will by no means enter into it.”
16  And he took the children into his arms and began blessing them, laying his hands upon them.
17  And as he was going out on his way, a certain man ran up and fell upon his knees before him and put the question to him: “Good Teacher, what must I do to inherit everlasting life?”
18  Jesus said to him: “Why do you call me good? Nobody is good, except one, God.
19  You know the commandments, ‘Do not murder, Do not commit adultery, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Do not defraud, Honor your father and mother.’”
20  The man said to him: “Teacher, all these things I have kept from my youth on.”
21  Jesus looked upon him and felt love for him and said to him: “One thing is missing about you: Go, sell what things you have and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven, and come be my follower.”
22  But he grew sad at the saying and went off grieved, for he was holding many possessions.
23  After looking around Jesus said to his disciples: “How difficult a thing it will be for those with money to enter into the kingdom of God!”
24  But the disciples gave way to surprise at his words. In response Jesus again said to them: “Children, how difficult a thing it is to enter into the kingdom of God!
25  It is easier for a camel to go through a needle’s eye than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.”
26  They became still more astounded and said to him: “Who, in fact, can be saved?”
27  Looking straight at them Jesus said: “With men it is impossible, but not so with God, for all things are possible with God.”
28  Peter started to say to him: “Look! We left all things and have been following you.”
29  Jesus said: “Truly I say to YOU men, No one has left house or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or fields for my sake and for the sake of the good news
30  who will not get a hundredfold now in this period of time, houses and brothers and sisters and mothers and children and fields, with persecutions, and in the coming system of things everlasting life.
31  However, many that are first will be last, and the last first.”
32  Now they were advancing on the road up to Jerusalem, and Jesus was going in front of them, and they felt amazement;  but those who followed began to fear. Once again he took the twelve aside and started to tell them these things destined to befall him:
33  “Here we are, advancing up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man will be delivered to the chief priests and the scribes, and they will condemn him to death and will deliver him to [men of] the nations,
34  and they will make fun of him and will spit upon him and scourge him and kill him, but three days later he will rise.”
35  And James and John, the two sons of Zebedee, stepped up to him and said to him: “Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever it is we ask you for.”
36  He said to them: “What do YOU want me to do for YOU?”
37  They said to him: “Grant us to sit down, one at your right hand and one at your left, in your glory.”
38  But Jesus said to them: “YOU do not know what YOU are asking for. Are YOU able to drink the cup which I am drinking, or to be baptized with the baptism with which I am being baptized?”
39  They said to him: “We are able.” At that Jesus said to them: “The cup I am drinking YOU will drink, and with the baptism with which I am being baptized YOU will be baptized.
40  However, this sitting down at my right or at my left is not mine to give, but it belongs to those for whom it has been prepared.”
41  Well, when the ten others heard about it, they started to be indignant at James and John.
42  But Jesus, after calling them to him, said to them: “YOU know that those who appear to be ruling the nations lord it over them and their great ones wield authority over them.
43  This is not the way among YOU;  but whoever wants to become great among YOU must be YOUR minister,
44  and whoever wants to be first among YOU must be the slave of all.
45  For even the Son of man came, not to be ministered to, but to minister and to give his soul a ransom in exchange for many.”
46  And they came into Jericho. But as he and his disciples and a considerable crowd were going out of Jericho, Bartimaeus (the son of Timaeus), a blind beggar, was sitting beside the road.
47  When he heard that it was Jesus the Nazarene, he started shouting and saying: “Son of David, Jesus, have mercy on me!”
48  At this many began sternly telling him to be silent;  but he kept shouting that much more: “Son of David, have mercy on me!”
49  So Jesus stopped and said: “CALL him.” And they called the blind man, saying to him: “Take courage, get up, he is calling you.”
50  Throwing off his outer garment, he leaped to his feet and went to Jesus.
51  And in answer to him Jesus said: “What do you want me to do for you?” The blind man said to him: “Rabboni, let me recover sight.”
52  And Jesus said to him: “Go, your faith has made you well.” And immediately he recovered sight, and he began to follow him on the road.
mark 11
11  Now when they were getting near to Jerusalem, to Bethphage and Bethany at the Mount of Olives, he dispatched two of his disciples
2  and told them: “Go into the village that is within sight of YOU, and as soon as YOU pass into it YOU will find a colt tied, on which none of mankind has yet sat;  loose it and bring it.
3  And if anyone says to YOU, ‘Why are YOU doing this?’ say, ‘The Lord needs it, and will at once send it off back here.’”
4  So they went away and found the colt tied at the door, outside on the side street, and they loosed it.
5  But some of those standing there began to say to them: “What are YOU doing loosing the colt?”
6  They said to these just as Jesus had said;  and they let them go.
7  And they brought the colt to Jesus, and they put their outer garments upon it, and he sat on it.
8  Also, many spread their outer garments on the road, but others cut down foliage from the fields.
9  And those going in front and those coming behind kept crying out: “Save, we pray! Blessed is he that comes in Jehovah’s name!
10  Blessed is the coming kingdom of our father David! Save, we pray, in the heights above!”
11  And he entered into Jerusalem, into the temple;  and he looked around upon all things, and, as the hour was already late, he went out to Bethany with the twelve.
12  The next day, when they had come out from Bethany, he became hungry.
13  And from a distance he caught sight of a fig tree that had leaves, and he went to see whether he would perhaps find something on it. But, on coming to it, he found nothing but leaves, for it was not the season of figs.
14  So, in response, he said to it: “Let no one eat fruit from you anymore forever.” And his disciples were listening.
15  Now they came to Jerusalem. There he entered into the temple and started to throw out those selling and buying in the temple, and he overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves; 
16  and he would not let anyone carry a utensil through the temple,
17  but he kept teaching and saying: “Is it not written, ‘My house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations’? But YOU have made it a cave of robbers.”
18  And the chief priests and the scribes heard it, and they began to seek how to destroy him;  for they were in fear of him, for all the crowd was continually being astounded at his teaching.
19  And when it became late in the day, they would go out of the city.
20  But when they were passing by early in the morning, they saw the fig tree already withered up from the roots.
21  So Peter, remembering it, said to him: “Rabbi, see! the fig tree that you cursed has withered up.”
22  And in reply Jesus said to them: “Have faith in God.
23  Truly I say to YOU that whoever tells this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,’ and does not doubt in his heart but has faith that what he says is going to occur, he will have it so.
24  This is why I tell YOU, All the things YOU pray and ask for have faith that YOU have practically received, and YOU will have them.
25  And when YOU stand praying, forgive whatever YOU have against anyone;  in order that YOUR Father who is in the heavens may also forgive YOU YOUR trespasses.”
26  ——
27  And they came again to Jerusalem. And as he was walking in the temple, the chief priests and the scribes and the older men came to him
28  and began to say to him: “By what authority do you do these things? or who gave you this authority to do these things?”
29  Jesus said to them: “I will ask YOU one question. YOU answer me, and I will also tell YOU by what authority I do these things.
30  Was the baptism by John from heaven or from men? Answer me.”
31  So they began to reason among themselves, saying: “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Why is it, therefore, YOU did not believe him?’
32  But dare we say, ‘From men’?”—They were in fear of the crowd, for these all held that John had really been a prophet.
33  Well, in reply to Jesus they said: “We do not know.” And Jesus said to them: “Neither am I telling YOU by what authority I do these things.”
mark 12
12  Also, he started to speak to them with illustrations: “A man planted a vineyard, and put a fence around it, and dug a vat for the winepress and erected a tower, and let it out to cultivators, and traveled abroad.
2  Now in due season he sent forth a slave to the cultivators, that he might get some of the fruits of the vineyard from the cultivators.
3  But they took him, beat him up and sent him away empty.
4  And again he sent forth another slave to them;  and that one they struck on the head and dishonored.
5  And he sent forth another, and that one they killed;  and many others, some of whom they beat up and some of whom they killed.
6  One more he had, a beloved son. He sent him forth last to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’
7  But those cultivators said among themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come, let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’
8  So they took him and killed him, and threw him outside the vineyard.
9  What will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and destroy the cultivators, and will give the vineyard to others.
10  Did YOU never read this scripture, ‘The stone that the builders rejected, this has become the chief cornerstone.
11  From Jehovah this has come to be, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?”
12  At that they began seeking how to seize him, but they feared the crowd, for they took note that he spoke the illustration with them in mind. So they left him and went away.
13  Next they sent forth to him some of the Pharisees and of the party followers of Herod, to catch him in his speech.
14  On arrival these said to him: “Teacher, we know you are truthful and you do not care for anybody, for you do not look upon men’s outward appearance, but you teach the way of God in line with truth: Is it lawful to pay head tax to Caesar or not?
15  Shall we pay, or shall we not pay?” Detecting their hypocrisy, he said to them: “Why do YOU put me to the test? Bring me a denarius to look at.”
16  They brought one. And he said to them: “Whose image and inscription is this?” They said to him: “Caesar’s.”
17  Jesus then said: “Pay back Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to God.” And they began to marvel at him.
18  Now Sadducees came to him, who say there is no resurrection, and they put the question to him:
19  “Teacher, Moses wrote us that if someone’s brother dies and leaves a wife behind but does not leave a child, his brother should take the wife and raise up offspring from her for his brother.
20  There were seven brothers;  and the first took a wife, but when he died he left no offspring.
21  And the second took her, but died without leaving offspring;  and the third the same way.
22  And the seven did not leave any offspring. Last of all the woman also died.
23  In the resurrection to which of them will she be wife? For the seven got her as wife.”
24  Jesus said to them: “Is not this why YOU are mistaken, YOUR not knowing either the Scriptures or the power of God?
25  For when they rise from the dead, neither do men marry nor are women given in marriage, but are as angels in the heavens.
26  But concerning the dead, that they are raised up, did YOU not read in the book of Moses, in the account about the thornbush, how God said to him, ‘I am the God of Abraham and God of Isaac and God of Jacob’?
27  He is a God, not of the dead, but of the living. YOU are much mistaken.”
28  Now one of the scribes that had come up and heard them disputing, knowing that he had answered them in a fine way, asked him: “Which commandment is first of all?”
29  Jesus answered: “The first is, ‘Hear, O Israel, Jehovah our God is one Jehovah,
30  and you must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind and with your whole strength.’
31  The second is this, ‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’ There is no other commandment greater than these.”
32  The scribe said to him: “Teacher, you well said in line with truth, ‘He is One, and there is no other than He’; 
33  and this loving him with one’s whole heart and with one’s whole understanding and with one’s whole strength and this loving one’s neighbor as oneself is worth far more than all the whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.”
34  At this Jesus, discerning he had answered intelligently, said to him: “You are not far from the kingdom of God.” But nobody had the courage anymore to question him.
35  However, when making a reply, Jesus began to say as he taught in the temple: “How is it that the scribes say that the Christ is David’s son?
36  By the holy spirit David himself said, ‘Jehovah said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies beneath your feet.”’
37  David himself calls him ‘Lord,’ but how does it come that he is his son?” And the great crowd was listening to him with pleasure.
38  And in his teaching he went on to say: “Look out for the scribes that want to walk around in robes and want greetings in the marketplaces
39  and front seats in the synagogues and most prominent places at evening meals.
40  They are the ones devouring the houses of the widows and for a pretext making long prayers;  these will receive a heavier judgment.”
41  And he sat down with the treasury chests in view and began observing how the crowd was dropping money into the treasury chests;  and many rich people were dropping in many coins.
42  Now a poor widow came and dropped in two small coins, which have very little value.
43  So he called his disciples to him and said to them: “Truly I say to YOU that this poor widow dropped in more than all those dropping money into the treasury chests; 
44  for they all dropped in out of their surplus, but she, out of her want, dropped in all of what she had, her whole living.”
mark 13
13  As he was going out of the temple one of his disciples said to him: “Teacher, see! what sort of stones and what sort of buildings!”
2  However, Jesus said to him: “Do you behold these great buildings? By no means will a stone be left here upon a stone and not be thrown down.”
3  And as he was sitting on the Mount of Olives with the temple in view, Peter and James and John and Andrew began to ask him privately:
4  “Tell us, When will these things be, and what will be the sign when all these things are destined to come to a conclusion?”
5  So Jesus started to say to them: “Look out that nobody misleads YOU.
6  Many will come on the basis of my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and will mislead many.
7  Moreover, when YOU hear of wars and reports of wars, do not be terrified;  [these things] must take place, but the end is not yet.
8  “For nation will rise against nation and kingdom against kingdom, there will be earthquakes in one place after another, there will be food shortages. These are a beginning of pangs of distress.
9  “As for YOU, look out for yourselves;  people will deliver YOU up to local courts, and YOU will be beaten in synagogues and be put on the stand before governors and kings for my sake, for a witness to them.
10  Also, in all the nations the good news has to be preached first.
11  But when they are leading YOU along to deliver YOU up, do not be anxious beforehand about what to speak;  but whatever is given YOU in that hour, speak this, for YOU are not the ones speaking, but the holy spirit is.
12  Furthermore, brother will deliver brother over to death, and a father a child, and children will rise up against parents and have them put to death; 
13  and YOU will be objects of hatred by all people on account of my name. But he that has endured to the end is the one that will be saved.
14  “However, when YOU catch sight of the disgusting thing that causes desolation standing where it ought not (let the reader use discernment), then let those in Judea begin fleeing to the mountains.
15  Let the man on the housetop not come down, nor go inside to take anything out of his house; 
16  and let the man in the field not return to the things behind to pick up his outer garment.
17  Woe to the pregnant women and those suckling a baby in those days!
18  Keep praying that it may not occur in wintertime; 
19  for those days will be [days of] a tribulation such as has not occurred from [the] beginning of the creation which God created until that time, and will not occur again.
20  In fact, unless Jehovah had cut short the days, no flesh would be saved. But on account of the chosen ones whom he has chosen he has cut short the days.
21  “Then, too, if anyone says to YOU, ‘See! Here is the Christ,’ ‘See! There he is,’ do not believe [it].
22  For false Christs and false prophets will arise and will give signs and wonders to lead astray, if possible, the chosen ones.
23  YOU, then, watch out;  I have told YOU all things beforehand.
24  “But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light,
25  and the stars will be falling out of heaven, and the powers that are in the heavens will be shaken.
26  And then they will see the Son of man coming in clouds with great power and glory.
27  And then he will send forth the angels and will gather his chosen ones together from the four winds, from earth’s extremity to heaven’s extremity.
28  “Now from the fig tree learn the illustration: Just as soon as its young branch grows tender and puts forth its leaves, YOU know that summer is near.
29  Likewise also YOU, when YOU see these things happening, know that he is near, at the doors.
30  Truly I say to YOU that this generation will by no means pass away until all these things happen.
31  Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.
32  “Concerning that day or the hour nobody knows, neither the angels in heaven nor the Son, but the Father.
33  Keep looking, keep awake, for YOU do not know when the appointed time is.
34  It is like a man traveling abroad that left his house and gave the authority to his slaves, to each one his work, and commanded the doorkeeper to keep on the watch.
35  Therefore keep on the watch, for YOU do not know when the master of the house is coming, whether late in the day or at midnight or at cockcrowing or early in the morning; 
36  in order that when he arrives suddenly, he does not find YOU sleeping.
37  But what I say to YOU I say to all, Keep on the watch.”
mark 14
14  Now the passover and the [festival of] unfermented cakes was two days later. And the chief priests and the scribes were seeking how to seize him by crafty device and kill him; 
2  for they repeatedly said: “Not at the festival;  perhaps there might be an uproar of the people.”
3  And while he was at Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as he was reclining at the meal, a woman came with an alabaster case of perfumed oil, genuine nard, very expensive. Breaking open the alabaster case she began to pour it upon his head.
4  At this there were some expressing indignation among themselves: “Why has this waste of the perfumed oil taken place?
5  For this perfumed oil could have been sold for upward of three hundred denarii and been given to the poor!” And they were feeling great displeasure at her.
6  But Jesus said: “Let her alone. Why do YOU try to make trouble for her? She did a fine deed toward me.
7  For YOU always have the poor with YOU, and whenever YOU want to YOU can always do them good, but me YOU do not have always.
8  She did what she could;  she undertook beforehand to put perfumed oil on my body in view of the burial.
9  Truly I say to YOU, Wherever the good news is preached in all the world, what this woman did shall also be told as a remembrance of her.”
10  And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went off to the chief priests in order to betray him to them.
11  When they heard it, they rejoiced and promised to give him silver money. So he began seeking how to betray him conveniently.
12  Now on the first day of unfermented cakes, when they customarily sacrificed the passover [victim], his disciples said to him: “Where do you want us to go and prepare for you to eat the passover?”
13  With that he sent forth two of his disciples and said to them: “Go into the city, and a man carrying an earthenware vessel of water will encounter YOU. Follow him,
14  and wherever he goes inside say to the householder, ‘The Teacher says: “Where is the guest room for me where I may eat the passover with my disciples?”’
15  And he will show YOU a large upper room, furnished in preparation;  and there prepare for us.”
16  So the disciples went out, and they entered the city and found it just as he said to them;  and they prepared for the passover.
17  After evening had fallen he came with the twelve.
18  And as they were reclining at the table and eating, Jesus said: “Truly I say to YOU, One of YOU, who is eating with me, will betray me.”
19  They started to be grieved and to say to him one by one: “It is not I, is it?”
20  He said to them: “It is one of the twelve, who is dipping with me into the common bowl.
21  True, the Son of man is going away, just as it is written concerning him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of man is betrayed! It would have been finer for that man if he had not been born.”
22  And as they continued eating, he took a loaf, said a blessing, broke it and gave it to them, and said: “Take it, this means my body.”
23  And taking a cup, he offered thanks and gave it to them, and they all drank out of it.
24  And he said to them: “This means my ‘blood of the covenant,’ which is to be poured out in behalf of many.
25  Truly I say to YOU, I shall by no means drink anymore of the product of the vine until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God.”
26  Finally, after singing praises, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
27  And Jesus said to them: “YOU will all be stumbled, because it is written, ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered about.’
28  But after I have been raised up I will go ahead of YOU into Galilee.”
29  But Peter said to him: “Even if all the others are stumbled, yet I will not be.”
30  At that Jesus said to him: “Truly I say to you, You today, yes, this night, before a cock crows twice, even you will disown me three times.”
31  But he began to say profusely: “If I have to die with you, I will by no means disown you.” Also, all the others began saying the same thing.
32  So they came to a spot named Gethsemane, and he said to his disciples: “Sit down here while I pray.”
33  And he took Peter and James and John along with him, and he started to be stunned and to be sorely troubled.
34  And he said to them: “My soul is deeply grieved, even to death. Stay here and keep on the watch.”
35  And going a little way forward he proceeded to fall on the ground and began praying that, if it were possible, the hour might pass away from him.
36  And he went on to say: “Abba, Father, all things are possible to you;  remove this cup from me. Yet not what I want, but what you want.”
37  And he came and found them sleeping, and he said to Peter: “Simon, are you sleeping? Did you not have strength to keep on the watch one hour?
38  Men, keep on the watch and praying, in order that YOU do not come into temptation. The spirit, of course, is eager, but the flesh is weak.”
39  And he went away again and prayed, saying the same word.
40  And again he came and found them sleeping, for their eyes were weighed down, and so they did not know what to answer him.
41  And he came the third time and said to them: “At such a time as this YOU are sleeping and taking YOUR rest! It is enough! The hour has come! Look! The Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
42  Get up, let us go. Look! My betrayer has drawn near.”
43  And immediately, while he was yet speaking, Judas, one of the twelve, arrived and with him a crowd with swords and clubs from the chief priests and the scribes and the older men.
44  Now his betrayer had given them an agreed sign, saying: “Whoever it is I kiss, this is he;  take him into custody and lead him away safely.”
45  And he came straight up and approached him and said: “Rabbi!” and kissed him very tenderly.
46  So they laid their hands upon him and took him into custody.
47  However, a certain one of those standing by drew his sword and struck the slave of the high priest and took his ear off.
48  But in response Jesus said to them: “Did YOU come out with swords and clubs as against a robber to arrest me?
49  Day after day I was with YOU in the temple teaching, and yet YOU did not take me into custody. Nevertheless, it is in order that the Scriptures may be fulfilled.”
50  And they all abandoned him and fled.
51  But a certain young man wearing a fine linen garment over his naked body began to follow him nearby;  and they tried to seize him,
52  but he left his linen garment behind and got away naked.
53  They now led Jesus away to the high priest, and all the chief priests and the older men and the scribes assembled.
54  But Peter, from a good distance, followed him as far as in the courtyard of the high priest;  and he was sitting together with the house attendants and warming himself before a bright fire.
55  Meantime the chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were looking for testimony against Jesus to put him to death, but they were not finding any.
56  Many, indeed, were giving false witness against him, but their testimonies were not in agreement.
57  Also, certain ones were rising and bearing false witness against him, saying:
58  “We heard him say, ‘I will throw down this temple that was made with hands and in three days I will build another not made with hands.’”
59  But neither on these grounds was their testimony in agreement.
60  Finally the high priest rose in their midst and questioned Jesus, saying: “Do you say nothing in reply? What is it these are testifying against you?”
61  But he kept silent and made no reply at all. Again the high priest began to question him and said to him: “Are you the Christ the Son of the Blessed One?”
62  Then Jesus said: “I am;  and YOU persons will see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of power and coming with the clouds of heaven.”
63  At this the high priest ripped his inner garments and said: “What further need do we have of witnesses?
64  YOU heard the blasphemy. What is evident to YOU?” They all condemned him to be liable to death.
65  And some started to spit on him and to cover his whole face and hit him with their fists and say to him: “Prophesy!” And, slapping him in the face, the court attendants took him.
66  Now while Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the servant girls of the high priest came,
67  and, seeing Peter warming himself, she looked straight at him and said: “You, too, were with the Nazarene, this Jesus.”
68  But he denied it, saying: “Neither do I know him nor do I understand what you are saying,” and he went outside to the vestibule.
69  There the servant girl, at the sight of him, started again to say to those standing by: “This is one of them.”
70  Again he was denying it. And once more after a little while those standing by began saying to Peter: “Certainly you are one of them, for, in fact, you are a Galilean.”
71  But he commenced to curse and swear: “I do not know this man of whom YOU speak.”
72  And immediately a cock crowed a second time;  and Peter recalled the saying that Jesus spoke to him: “Before a cock crows twice, you will disown me three times.” And he broke down and gave way to weeping.
mark 15
15  And immediately at dawn the chief priests with the older men and the scribes, even the whole Sanhedrin, conducted a consultation, and they bound Jesus and led him off and handed him over to Pilate.
2  So Pilate put the question to him: “Are you the king of the Jews?” In answer to him he said: “You yourself say [it].”
3  But the chief priests proceeded to accuse him of many things.
4  Now Pilate began questioning him again, saying: “Have you no reply to make? See how many charges they are bringing against you.”
5  But Jesus made no further answer, so that Pilate began to marvel.
6  Well, from festival to festival he used to release to them one prisoner, whom they petitioned for.
7  At the time there was the so-called Barabbas in bonds with the seditionists, who in their sedition had committed murder.
8  So the crowd came on up and started to make petition according to what he used to do for them.
9  Pilate responded to them, saying: “Do YOU want me to release to YOU the king of the Jews?”
10  For he was aware that because of envy the chief priests had handed him over.
11  But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have him release Barabbas to them, instead.
12  Again in reply Pilate was saying to them: “What, then, shall I do with him whom YOU call the king of the Jews?”
13  Once more they cried out: “Impale him!”
14  But Pilate went on to say to them: “Why, what bad thing did he do?” Still they cried out all the more: “Impale him!”
15  At that Pilate, wishing to satisfy the crowd, released Barabbas to them, and, after having Jesus whipped, he handed him over to be impaled.
16  The soldiers now led him off into the courtyard, that is, into the governor’s palace;  and they called the whole body of troops together,
17  and they decked him with purple and braided a crown of thorns and put it on him.
18  And they started greeting him: “Good day, you King of the Jews!”
19  Also, they would hit him on the head with a reed and spit upon him and, bending their knees, they would do obeisance to him.
20  Finally, when they had made fun of him, they stripped him of the purple and put his outer garments upon him. And they led him out to impale him.
21  Also, they impressed into service a passerby, a certain Simon of Cyrene, coming from the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, that he should lift up his torture stake.
22  So they brought him to the place Golgotha, which means, when translated, Skull Place.
23  Here they tried to give him wine drugged with myrrh, but he would not take it.
24  And they impaled him and distributed his outer garments by casting the lot over them as to who takes what.
25  It was now the third hour, and they impaled him.
26  And the inscription of the charge against him was written above, “The King of the Jews.”
27  Moreover, they impaled two robbers with him, one on his right and one on his left.
28  ——
29  And those going by would speak abusively to him, wagging their heads and saying: “Bah! You would-be thrower-down of the temple and builder of it in three days’ time,
30  save yourself by coming down off the torture stake.”
31  In like manner also the chief priests were making fun among themselves with the scribes and saying: “Others he saved;  himself he cannot save!
32  Let the Christ the King of Israel now come down off the torture stake, that we may see and believe.” Even those impaled together with him were reproaching him.
33  When it became the sixth hour a darkness fell over the whole land until the ninth hour.
34  And at the ninth hour Jesus called out with a loud voice: “Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani?” which means, when translated: “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”
35  And some of those standing near, on hearing it, began to say: “See! He is calling Elijah.”
36  But a certain one ran, soaked a sponge with sour wine, put it on a reed, and began giving him a drink, saying: “LET [him] be! Let us see whether Elijah comes to take him down.”
37  But Jesus let out a loud cry and expired.
38  And the curtain of the sanctuary was rent in two from top to bottom.
39  Now, when the army officer that was standing by with him in view saw he had expired under these circumstances, he said: “Certainly this man was God’s Son.”
40  There were also women viewing from a distance, among them Mary Magdalene as well as Mary the mother of James the Less and of Joses, and Salome,
41  who used to accompany him and minister to him when he was in Galilee, and many other women who had come up together with him to Jerusalem.
42  Now as it was already late in the afternoon, and since it was Preparation, that is, the day before the sabbath,
43  there came Joseph of Arimathea, a reputable member of the Council, who also himself was waiting for the kingdom of God. He took courage to go in before Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.
44  But Pilate wondered whether he was already dead, and, summoning the army officer, he asked him whether he had already died.
45  So after making certain from the army officer, he granted the corpse to Joseph.
46  Accordingly he bought fine linen and took him down, wrapped him in the fine linen and laid him in a tomb which was quarried out of a rock-mass;  and he rolled a stone up to the door of the memorial tomb.
47  But Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses continued looking at where he had been laid.
mark 16
16  So when the sabbath had passed, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought spices in order to come and grease him.
2  And very early on the first day of the week they came to the memorial tomb, when the sun had risen.
3  And they were saying one to another: “Who will roll the stone away from the door of the memorial tomb for us?”
4  But when they looked up, they beheld that the stone had been rolled away, although it was very large.
5  When they entered into the memorial tomb, they saw a young man sitting on the right side clothed in a white robe, and they were stunned.
6  He said to them: “Stop being stunned. YOU are looking for Jesus the Nazarene, who was impaled. He was raised up, he is not here. See! The place where they laid him.
7  But go, tell his disciples and Peter, ‘He is going ahead of YOU into Galilee;  there YOU will see him, just as he told YOU.’”
8  So when they came out they fled from the memorial tomb, for trembling and strong emotion were gripping them. And they told nobody anything, for they were in fear.
9  After he rose early on the first day of the week he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had expelled seven demons.
10  She went and reported to those who had been with him, as they were mourning and weeping.
11  But they, when they heard he had come to life and had been viewed by her, did not believe.
12  Moreover, after these things he appeared in another form to two of them walking along, as they were going into the country; 
13  and they came back and reported to the rest. Neither did they believe these.
14  But later he appeared to the eleven themselves as they were reclining at the table, and he reproached their lack of faith and hardheartedness, because they did not believe those who had beheld him now raised up from the dead.
15  And he said to them: “Go into all the world and preach the good news to all creation.
16  He that believes and is baptized will be saved, but he that does not believe will be condemned.
17  Furthermore, these signs will accompany those believing: By the use of my name they will expel demons, they will speak with tongues,
18  and with their hands they will pick up serpents, and if they drink anything deadly it will not hurt them at all. They will lay their hands upon sick persons, and these will become well.”
19  So, then, the Lord Jesus, after having spoken to them, was taken up to heaven and sat down at the right hand of God.
20  They, accordingly, went out and preached everywhere, while the Lord worked with them and backed up the message through the accompanying signs.
luke 1
1  Whereas many have undertaken to compile a statement of the facts that are given full credence among us,
2  just as those who from [the] beginning became eyewitnesses and attendants of the message delivered these to us,
3  I resolved also, because I have traced all things from the start with accuracy, to write them in logical order to you, most excellent Theophilus,
4  that you may know fully the certainty of the things that you have been taught orally.
5  In the days of Herod, king of Judea, there happened to be a certain priest named Zechariah of the division of Abijah, and he had a wife from the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.
6  They both were righteous before God because of walking blamelessly in accord with all the commandments and legal requirements of Jehovah.
7  But they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and they both were well along in years.
8  Now as he was acting as priest in the assignment of his division before God,
9  according to the solemn practice of the priestly office it became his turn to offer incense when he entered into the sanctuary of Jehovah; 
10  and all the multitude of the people was praying outside at the hour of offering incense.
11  To him Jehovah’s angel appeared, standing at the right side of the incense altar.
12  But Zechariah became troubled at the sight, and fear fell upon him.
13  However, the angel said to him: “Have no fear, Zechariah, because your supplication has been favorably heard, and your wife Elizabeth will become mother to a son to you, and you are to call his name John.
14  And you will have joy and great gladness, and many will rejoice over his birth; 
15  for he will be great before Jehovah. But he must drink no wine and strong drink at all, and he will be filled with holy spirit right from his mother’s womb; 
16  and many of the sons of Israel will he turn back to Jehovah their God.
17  Also, he will go before him with Elijah’s spirit and power, to turn back the hearts of fathers to children and the disobedient ones to the practical wisdom of righteous ones, to get ready for Jehovah a prepared people.”
18  And Zechariah said to the angel: “How am I to be sure of this? For I am aged and my wife is well along in years.”
19  In reply the angel said to him: “I am Gabriel, who stands near before God, and I was sent forth to speak with you and declare the good news of these things to you.
20  But, look! you will be silent and not able to speak until the day that these things take place, because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their appointed time.”
21  Meanwhile the people continued waiting for Zechariah, and they began to wonder at his delaying in the sanctuary.
22  But when he came out he was not able to speak to them, and they perceived that he had just seen a supernatural sight in the sanctuary;  and he kept making signs to them, but remained dumb.
23  When, now, the days of his public service were fulfilled, he went off to his home.
24  But after these days Elizabeth his wife became pregnant;  and she kept herself secluded for five months, saying:
25  “This is the way Jehovah has dealt with me in these days when he has given me his attention to take away my reproach among men.”
26  In her sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent forth from God to a city of Galilee named Nazareth,
27  to a virgin promised in marriage to a man named Joseph of David’s house;  and the name of the virgin was Mary.
28  And when he went in before her he said: “Good day, highly favored one, Jehovah is with you.”
29  But she was deeply disturbed at the saying and began to reason out what sort of greeting this might be.
30  So the angel said to her: “Have no fear, Mary, for you have found favor with God; 
31  and, look! you will conceive in your womb and give birth to a son, and you are to call his name Jesus.
32  This one will be great and will be called Son of the Most High;  and Jehovah God will give him the throne of David his father,
33  and he will rule as king over the house of Jacob forever, and there will be no end of his kingdom.”
34  But Mary said to the angel: “How is this to be, since I am having no intercourse with a man?”
35  In answer the angel said to her: “Holy spirit will come upon you, and power of the Most High will overshadow you. For that reason also what is born will be called holy, God’s Son.
36  And, look! Elizabeth your relative has also herself conceived a son, in her old age, and this is the sixth month for her, the so-called barren woman; 
37  because with God no declaration will be an impossibility.”
38  Then Mary said: “Look! Jehovah’s slave girl! May it take place with me according to your declaration.” At that the angel departed from her.
39  So Mary rose in these days and went into the mountainous country with haste, to a city of Judah,
40  and she entered into the home of Zechariah and greeted Elizabeth.
41  Well, as Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary, the infant in her womb leaped;  and Elizabeth was filled with holy spirit,
42  and she called out with a loud cry and said: “Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb!
43  So how is it that this [privilege] is mine, to have the mother of my Lord come to me?
44  For, look! as the sound of your greeting fell upon my ears, the infant in my womb leaped with great gladness.
45  Happy too is she that believed, because there will be a complete performance of those things spoken to her from Jehovah.”
46  And Mary said: “My soul magnifies Jehovah,
47  and my spirit cannot keep from being overjoyed at God my Savior; 
48  because he has looked upon the low position of his slave girl. For, look! from now on all generations will pronounce me happy; 
49  because the powerful One has done great deeds for me, and holy is his name; 
50  and for generations after generations his mercy is upon those who fear him.
51  He has performed mightily with his arm, he has scattered abroad those who are haughty in the intention of their hearts.
52  He has brought down men of power from thrones and exalted lowly ones; 
53  he has fully satisfied hungry ones with good things and he has sent away empty those who had wealth.
54  He has come to the aid of Israel his servant, to call to mind mercy,
55  just as he told to our forefathers, to Abraham and to his seed, forever.”
56  Then Mary remained with her about three months, and returned to her own home.
57  The time now became due for Elizabeth to give birth, and she became mother to a son.
58  And the neighbors and her relatives heard that Jehovah had magnified his mercy to her, and they began to rejoice with her.
59  And on the eighth day they came to circumcise the young child, and they were going to call it by the name of its father, Zechariah.
60  But its mother answered and said: “No, indeed! but he shall be called John.”
61  At this they said to her: “There is no one among your relatives that is called by this name.”
62  Then they went asking its father by signs what he wanted it to be called.
63  And he asked for a tablet and wrote: “John is its name.” At this they all marveled.
64  Instantly his mouth was opened and his tongue loosed and he began to speak, blessing God.
65  And fear fell upon all those living in their neighborhood;  and in the whole mountainous country of Judea all these things began to be talked around,
66  and all that heard made note of it in their hearts, saying: “What really will this young child be?” For the hand of Jehovah was indeed with it.
67  And Zechariah its father was filled with holy spirit, and he prophesied, saying:
68  “Blessed be Jehovah the God of Israel, because he has turned his attention and performed deliverance toward his people.
69  And he has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of David his servant,
70  just as he, through the mouth of his holy prophets from of old, has spoken
71  of a salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all those hating us; 
72  to perform the mercy in connection with our forefathers and to call to mind his holy covenant,
73  the oath that he swore to Abraham our forefather,
74  to grant us, after we have been rescued from the hands of enemies, the privilege of fearlessly rendering sacred service to him
75  with loyalty and righteousness before him all our days.
76  But as for you, young child, you will be called a prophet of the Most High, for you will go in advance before Jehovah to make his ways ready,
77  to give knowledge of salvation to his people by forgiveness of their sins,
78  because of the tender compassion of our God. With this [compassion] a daybreak will visit us from on high,
79  to give light to those sitting in darkness and death’s shadow, to direct our feet prosperously in the way of peace.”
80  And the young child went on growing and getting strong in spirit, and he continued in the deserts until the day of showing himself openly to Israel.
luke 2
2  Now in those days a decree went forth from Caesar Augustus for all the inhabited earth to be registered; 
2  (this first registration took place when Quirinius was governor of Syria; )
3  and all people went traveling to be registered, each one to his own city.
4  Of course, Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea, to David’s city, which is called Bethlehem, because of his being a member of the house and family of David,
5  to get registered with Mary, who had been given him in marriage as promised, at present heavy with child.
6  While they were there, the days came to the full for her to give birth.
7  And she gave birth to her son, the firstborn, and she bound him with cloth bands and laid him in a manger, because there was no place for them in the lodging room.
8  There were also in that same country shepherds living out of doors and keeping watches in the night over their flocks.
9  And suddenly Jehovah’s angel stood by them, and Jehovah’s glory gleamed around them, and they became very fearful.
10  But the angel said to them: “Have no fear, for, look! I am declaring to YOU good news of a great joy that all the people will have,
11  because there was born to YOU today a Savior, who is Christ [the] Lord, in David’s city.
12  And this is a sign for YOU: YOU will find an infant bound in cloth bands and lying in a manger.”
13  And suddenly there came to be with the angel a multitude of the heavenly army, praising God and saying:
14  “Glory in the heights above to God, and upon earth peace among men of goodwill.”
15  So when the angels had departed from them into heaven, the shepherds began saying to one another: “Let us by all means go clear to Bethlehem and see this thing that has taken place, which Jehovah has made known to us.”
16  And they went with haste and found Mary as well as Joseph, and the infant lying in the manger.
17  When they saw it, they made known the saying that had been spoken to them concerning this young child.
18  And all that heard marveled over the things told them by the shepherds,
19  but Mary began to preserve all these sayings, drawing conclusions in her heart.
20  Then the shepherds went back, glorifying and praising God for all the things they heard and saw, just as these had been told them.
21  Now when eight days came to the full for circumcising him, his name was also called Jesus, the name called by the angel before he was conceived in the womb.
22  Also, when the days for purifying them according to the law of Moses came to the full, they brought him up to Jerusalem to present him to Jehovah,
23  just as it is written in Jehovah’s law: “Every male opening a womb must be called holy to Jehovah,”
24  and to offer sacrifice according to what is said in the law of Jehovah: “A pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons.”
25  And, look! there was a man in Jerusalem named Simeon, and this man was righteous and reverent, waiting for Israel’s consolation, and holy spirit was upon him.
26  Furthermore, it had been divinely revealed to him by the holy spirit that he would not see death before he had seen the Christ of Jehovah.
27  Under the power of the spirit he now came into the temple;  and as the parents brought the young child Jesus in to do for it according to the customary practice of the law,
28  he himself received it into his arms and blessed God and said:
29  “Now, Sovereign Lord, you are letting your slave go free in peace according to your declaration; 
30  because my eyes have seen your means of saving
31  that you have made ready in the sight of all the peoples,
32  a light for removing the veil from the nations and a glory of your people Israel.”
33  And its father and mother continued wondering at the things being spoken about it.
34  Also, Simeon blessed them, but said to Mary its mother: “Look! This one is laid for the fall and the rising again of many in Israel and for a sign to be talked against
35  (yes, a long sword will be run through the soul of you yourself), in order that the reasonings of many hearts may be uncovered.”
36  Now there was Anna a prophetess, Phanuel’s daughter, of Asher’s tribe (this woman was well along in years, and had lived with a husband for seven years from her virginity,
37  and she was a widow now eighty-four years old), who was never missing from the temple, rendering sacred service night and day with fastings and supplications.
38  And in that very hour she came near and began returning thanks to God and speaking about [the child] to all those waiting for Jerusalem’s deliverance.
39  So when they had carried out all the things according to the law of Jehovah, they went back into Galilee to their own city Nazareth.
40  And the young child continued growing and getting strong, being filled with wisdom, and God’s favor continued upon him.
41  Now his parents were accustomed to go from year to year to Jerusalem for the festival of the passover.
42  And when he became twelve years old, they went up according to the custom of the festival
43  and completed the days. But when they were returning, the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem, and his parents did not notice it.
44  Assuming that he was in the company traveling together, they covered a day’s distance and then began to hunt him up among the relatives and acquaintances.
45  But, not finding him, they returned to Jerusalem, making a diligent search for him.
46  Well, after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers and listening to them and questioning them.
47  But all those listening to him were in constant amazement at his understanding and his answers.
48  Now when they saw him they were astounded, and his mother said to him: “Child, why did you treat us this way? Here your father and I in mental distress have been looking for you.”
49  But he said to them: “Why did YOU have to go looking for me? Did YOU not know that I must be in the [house] of my Father?”
50  However, they did not grasp the saying that he spoke to them.
51  And he went down with them and came to Nazareth, and he continued subject to them. Also, his mother carefully kept all these sayings in her heart.
52  And Jesus went on progressing in wisdom and in physical growth and in favor with God and men.
luke 3
3  In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, when Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea, and Herod was district ruler of Galilee, but Philip his brother was district ruler of the country of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias was district ruler of Abilene,
2  in the days of chief priest Annas and of Caiaphas, God’s declaration came to John the son of Zechariah in the wilderness.
3  So he came into all the country around the Jordan, preaching baptism [in symbol] of repentance for forgiveness of sins,
4  just as it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet: “Listen! Someone is crying out in the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way of Jehovah, YOU people, make his roads straight.
5  Every gully must be filled up, and every mountain and hill leveled down, and the curves must become straight ways and the rough places smooth ways; 
6  and all flesh will see the saving means of God.’”
7  Therefore he began to say to the crowds coming out to be baptized by him: “YOU offspring of vipers, who has intimated to YOU to flee from the coming wrath?
8  Therefore produce fruits that befit repentance. And do not start saying within yourselves, ‘As a father we have Abraham.’ For I say to YOU that God has power to raise up children to Abraham from these stones.
9  Indeed, the ax is already in position at the root of the trees;  every tree, therefore, not producing fine fruit is to be cut down and thrown into the fire.”
10  And the crowds would ask him: “What, then, shall we do?”
11  In reply he would say to them: “Let the man that has two undergarments share with the man that has none, and let him that has things to eat do the same.”
12  But even tax collectors came to be baptized, and they said to him: “Teacher, what shall we do?”
13  He said to them: “Do not demand anything more than the tax rate.”
14  Also, those in military service would ask him: “What shall we also do?” And he said to them: “Do not harass anybody or accuse anybody falsely, but be satisfied with YOUR provisions.”
15  Now as the people were in expectation and all were reasoning in their hearts about John: “May he perhaps be the Christ?”
16  John gave the answer, saying to all: “I, for my part, baptize YOU with water;  but the one stronger than I am is coming, the lace of whose sandals I am not fit to untie. He will baptize YOU people with holy spirit and fire.
17  His winnowing shovel is in his hand to clean up his threshing floor completely and to gather the wheat into his storehouse, but the chaff he will burn up with fire that cannot be put out.”
18  Therefore he also gave many other exhortations and continued declaring good news to the people.
19  But Herod the district ruler, for being reproved by him concerning Herodias the wife of his brother and concerning all the wicked deeds that Herod did,
20  added also this to all those [deeds]: he locked John up in prison.
21  Now when all the people were baptized, Jesus also was baptized and, as he was praying, the heaven was opened up
22  and the holy spirit in bodily shape like a dove came down upon him, and a voice came out of heaven: “You are my Son, the beloved;  I have approved you.”
23  Furthermore, Jesus himself, when he commenced [his work], was about thirty years old, being the son, as the opinion was,of Joseph,[son] of Heli,
24  [son] of Matthat,[son] of Levi,[son] of Melchi,[son] of Jannai,[son] of Joseph,
25  [son] of Mattathias,[son] of Amos,[son] of Nahum,[son] of Esli,[son] of Naggai,
26  [son] of Maath,[son] of Mattathias,[son] of Semein,[son] of Josech,[son] of Joda,
27  [son] of Joanan,[son] of Rhesa,[son] of Zerubbabel,[son] of Shealtiel,[son] of Neri,
28  [son] of Melchi,[son] of Addi,[son] of Cosam,[son] of Elmadam,[son] of Er,
29  [son] of Jesus,[son] of Eliezer,[son] of Jorim,[son] of Matthat,[son] of Levi,
30  [son] of Symeon,[son] of Judas,[son] of Joseph,[son] of Jonam,[son] of Eliakim,
31  [son] of Melea,[son] of Menna,[son] of Mattatha,[son] of Nathan,[son] of David,
32  [son] of Jesse,[son] of Obed,[son] of Boaz,[son] of Salmon,[son] of Nahshon,
33  [son] of Amminadab,[son] of Arni,[son] of Hezron,[son] of Perez,[son] of Judah,
34  [son] of Jacob,[son] of Isaac,[son] of Abraham,[son] of Terah,[son] of Nahor,
35  [son] of Serug,[son] of Reu,[son] of Peleg,[son] of Eber,[son] of Shelah,
36  [son] of Cainan,[son] of Arpachshad,[son] of Shem,[son] of Noah,[son] of Lamech,
37  [son] of Methuselah,[son] of Enoch,[son] of Jared,[son] of Mahalaleel,[son] of Cainan,
38  [son] of Enosh,[son] of Seth,[son] of Adam,[son] of God.
luke 4
4  Now Jesus, full of holy spirit, turned away from the Jordan, and he was led about by the spirit in the wilderness
2  for forty days, while being tempted by the Devil. Furthermore, he ate nothing in those days, and so, when they were concluded, he felt hungry.
3  At this the Devil said to him: “If you are a son of God, tell this stone to become a loaf of bread.”
4  But Jesus replied to him: “It is written, ‘Man must not live by bread alone.’”
5  So he brought him up and showed him all the kingdoms of the inhabited earth in an instant of time; 
6  and the Devil said to him: “I will give you all this authority and the glory of them, because it has been delivered to me, and to whomever I wish I give it.
7  You, therefore, if you do an act of worship before me, it will all be yours.”
8  In reply Jesus said to him: “It is written, ‘It is Jehovah your God you must worship, and it is to him alone you must render sacred service.’”
9  Now he led him into Jerusalem and stationed him upon the battlement of the temple and said to him: “If you are a son of God, hurl yourself down from here; 
10  for it is written, ‘He will give his angels a charge concerning you, to preserve you,’
11  and, ‘They will carry you on their hands, that you may at no time strike your foot against a stone.’”
12  In answer Jesus said to him: “It is said, ‘You must not put Jehovah your God to the test.’”
13  So the Devil, having concluded all the temptation, retired from him until another convenient time.
14  Now Jesus returned in the power of the spirit into Galilee. And good talk concerning him spread out through all the surrounding country.
15  Also, he began to teach in their synagogues, being held in honor by all.
16  And he came to Nazareth, where he had been reared;  and, according to his custom on the sabbath day, he entered into the synagogue, and he stood up to read.
17  So the scroll of the prophet Isaiah was handed him, and he opened the scroll and found the place where it was written:
18  “Jehovah’s spirit is upon me, because he anointed me to declare good news to the poor, he sent me forth to preach a release to the captives and a recovery of sight to the blind, to send the crushed ones away with a release,
19  to preach Jehovah’s acceptable year.”
20  With that he rolled up the scroll, handed it back to the attendant and sat down;  and the eyes of all in the synagogue were intently fixed upon him.
21  Then he started to say to them: “Today this scripture that YOU just heard is fulfilled.”
22  And they all began to give favorable witness about him and to marvel at the winsome words proceeding out of his mouth, and they were saying: “This is a son of Joseph, is it not?”
23  At this he said to them: “No doubt YOU will apply this illustration to me, ‘Physician, cure yourself;  the things we heard as having happened in Capernaum do also here in your home territory.’”
24  But he said: “Truly I tell YOU that no prophet is accepted in his home territory.
25  For instance, I tell YOU in truth, There were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, so that a great famine fell upon all the land,
26  yet Elijah was sent to none of those [women], but only to Zarephath in the land of Sidon to a widow.
27  Also, there were many lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet, yet not one of them was cleansed, but Naaman the man of Syria.”
28  Now all those hearing these things in the synagogue became filled with anger; 
29  and they rose up and hurried him outside the city, and they led him to the brow of the mountain upon which their city had been built, in order to throw him down headlong.
30  But he went through the midst of them and continued on his way.
31  And he went down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee. And he was teaching them on the sabbath; 
32  and they were astounded at his way of teaching, because his speech was with authority.
33  Now in the synagogue there was a man with a spirit, an unclean demon, and he shouted with a loud voice:
34  “Ah! What have we to do with you, Jesus you Nazarene? Did you come to destroy us? I know exactly who you are, the Holy One of God.”
35  But Jesus rebuked it, saying: “Be silent, and come out of him.” So, after throwing the man down in their midst, the demon came out of him without hurting him.
36  At this, astonishment fell upon all, and they began to converse with one another, saying: “What sort of speech is this, because with authority and power he orders the unclean spirits, and out they come?”
37  So the news concerning him kept going out into every corner of the surrounding country.
38  After getting up out of the synagogue he entered into Simon’s home. Now Simon’s mother-in-law was distressed with a high fever, and they made request of him for her.
39  So he stood over her and rebuked the fever, and it left her. Instantly she rose and began ministering to them.
40  But when the sun was setting, all those who had people sick with various diseases brought them to him. By laying his hands upon each one of them he would cure them.
41  Demons also would come out of many, crying out and saying: “You are the Son of God.” But, rebuking them, he would not permit them to speak, because they knew him to be the Christ.
42  However, when it became day, he went out and proceeded to a lonely place. But the crowds began hunting about for him and came out as far as he was, and they tried to detain him from going away from them.
43  But he said to them: “Also to other cities I must declare the good news of the kingdom of God, because for this I was sent forth.”
44  Accordingly he went on preaching in the synagogues of Judea.
luke 5
5  On an occasion when the crowd was pressing close upon him and listening to the word of God, he was standing beside the lake of Gennesaret.
2  And he saw two boats docked at the lakeside, but the fishermen had got out of them and were washing off their nets.
3  Going aboard one of the boats, which was Simon’s, he asked him to pull away a bit from land. Then he sat down, and from the boat he began teaching the crowds.
4  When he ceased speaking, he said to Simon: “Pull out to where it is deep, and YOU men let down YOUR nets for a catch.”
5  But Simon in reply said: “Instructor, for a whole night we toiled and took nothing, but at your bidding I will lower the nets.”
6  Well, when they did this, they enclosed a great multitude of fish. In fact, their nets began ripping apart.
7  So they motioned to their partners in the other boat to come and assist them;  and they did come, and they filled both boats, so that these began to sink.
8  Seeing this, Simon Peter fell down at the knees of Jesus, saying: “Depart from me, because I am a sinful man, Lord.”
9  For at the catch of fish which they took up astonishment overwhelmed him and all those with him,
10  and likewise both James and John, Zebedee’s sons, who were sharers with Simon. But Jesus said to Simon: “Stop being afraid. From now on you will be catching men alive.”
11  So they brought the boats back to land, and abandoned everything and followed him.
12  On a further occasion while he was in one of the cities, look! a man full of leprosy! When he caught sight of Jesus he fell upon his face and begged him, saying: “Lord, if you just want to, you can make me clean.”
13  And so, stretching out his hand, he touched him, saying: “I want to. Be made clean.” And immediately the leprosy vanished from him.
14  And he gave the man orders to tell nobody: “But go off and show yourself to the priest, and make an offering in connection with your cleansing, just as Moses directed, for a witness to them.”
15  But the word about him was spreading the more, and great crowds would come together to listen and to be cured of their sicknesses.
16  However, he continued in retirement in the deserts and praying.
17  In the course of one of the days he was teaching, and Pharisees and teachers of the law who had come out of every village of Galilee and Judea and Jerusalem were sitting there;  and Jehovah’s power was there for him to do healing.
18  And, look! men carrying on a bed a man who was paralyzed, and they were seeking a way to bring him in and place him before him.
19  So, not finding a way to bring him in on account of the crowd, they climbed up to the roof, and through the tiling they let him down with the little bed among those in front of Jesus.
20  And when he saw their faith he said: “Man, your sins are forgiven you.”
21  Thereupon the scribes and the Pharisees started to reason, saying: “Who is this that is speaking blasphemies? Who can forgive sins except God alone?”
22  But Jesus, discerning their reasonings, said in answer to them: “What are YOU reasoning out in YOUR hearts?
23  Which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven you,’ or to say, ‘Get up and walk’?
24  But in order for YOU to know that the Son of man has authority on the earth to forgive sins—” he said to the paralyzed man: “I say to you, Get up and pick up your little bed and be on your way home.”
25  And instantly he rose up before them, picked up what he used to lie on and went off to his home, glorifying God.
26  Then an ecstasy seized one and all, and they began to glorify God, and they became filled with fear, saying: “We have seen strange things today!”
27  Now after these things he went out and beheld a tax collector named Levi sitting at the tax office, and he said to him: “Be my follower.”
28  And leaving everything behind he rose up and went following him.
29  Also, Levi spread a big reception feast for him in his house;  and there was a great crowd of tax collectors and others who were with them reclining at the meal.
30  At this the Pharisees and their scribes began murmuring to his disciples, saying: “Why is it YOU eat and drink with tax collectors and sinners?”
31  In reply Jesus said to them: “Those who are healthy do not need a physician, but those who are ailing do.
32  I have come to call, not righteous persons, but sinners to repentance.”
33  They said to him: “The disciples of John fast frequently and offer supplications, and so do those of the Pharisees, but yours eat and drink.”
34  Jesus said to them: “YOU cannot make the friends of the bridegroom fast while the bridegroom is with them, can YOU?
35  Yet days will come when the bridegroom will indeed be taken away from them;  then they will fast in those days.”
36  Further, he went on to give an illustration to them: “No one cuts a patch from a new outer garment and sews it onto an old outer garment;  but if he does, then both the new patch tears away and the patch from the new garment does not match the old.
37  Moreover, no one puts new wine into old wineskins;  but if he does, then the new wine will burst the wineskins, and it will be spilled out and the wineskins will be ruined.
38  But new wine must be put into new wineskins.
39  No one that has drunk old wine wants new;  for he says, ‘The old is nice.’”
luke 6
6  Now on a sabbath he happened to be passing through grainfields, and his disciples were plucking and eating the heads of grain, rubbing them with their hands.
2  At this some of the Pharisees said: “Why are YOU doing what is not lawful on the sabbath?”
3  But Jesus said in reply to them: “Have YOU never read the very thing David did when he and the men with him got hungry?
4  How he entered into the house of God and received the loaves of presentation and ate and gave some to the men with him, which it is lawful for no one to eat but for the priests only?”
5  And he went on to say to them: “Lord of the sabbath is what the Son of man is.”
6  In the course of another sabbath he entered into the synagogue and began teaching. And there was a man present whose right hand was withered.
7  The scribes and the Pharisees were now watching him closely to see whether he would cure on the sabbath, in order to find some way to accuse him.
8  He, however, knew their reasonings, yet he said to the man with the withered hand: “Get up and stand in the center.” And he rose and took his stand.
9  Then Jesus said to them: “I ask YOU men, Is it lawful on the sabbath to do good or to do injury, to save or to destroy a soul?”
10  And after looking around at them all, he said to the man: “Stretch out your hand.” He did so, and his hand was restored.
11  But they became filled with madness, and they began to talk over with one another what they might do to Jesus.
12  In the progress of these days he went out into the mountain to pray, and he continued the whole night in prayer to God.
13  But when it became day he called his disciples to him and chose from among them twelve, whom he also named apostles:
14  Simon, whom he also named Peter, and Andrew his brother, and James and John, and Philip and Bartholomew,
15  and Matthew and Thomas, and James [the son] of Alphaeus, and Simon who is called “the zealous one,”
16  and Judas [the son] of James, and Judas Iscariot, who turned traitor.
17  And he came down with them and took his station on a level place, and there was a great crowd of his disciples, and a great multitude of people from all of Judea and Jerusalem and the maritime country of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear him and be healed of their sicknesses.
18  Even those troubled with unclean spirits were cured.
19  And all the crowd were seeking to touch him, because power was going out of him and healing them all.
20  And he lifted up his eyes upon his disciples and began to say: “Happy are YOU poor, because YOURS is the kingdom of God.
21  “Happy are YOU who hunger now, because YOU will be filled. “Happy are YOU who weep now, because YOU will laugh.
22  “Happy are YOU whenever men hate YOU, and whenever they exclude YOU and reproach YOU and cast out YOUR name as wicked for the sake of the Son of man.
23  Rejoice in that day and leap, for, look! YOUR reward is great in heaven, for those are the same things their forefathers used to do to the prophets.
24  “But woe to YOU rich persons, because YOU are having YOUR consolation in full.
25  “Woe to YOU who are filled up now, because YOU will go hungry. “Woe, YOU who are laughing now, because YOU will mourn and weep.
26  “Woe, whenever all men speak well of YOU, for things like these are what their forefathers did to the false prophets.
27  “But I say to YOU who are listening, Continue to love YOUR enemies, to do good to those hating YOU,
28  to bless those cursing YOU, to pray for those who are insulting YOU.
29  To him that strikes you on the one cheek, offer the other also;  and from him that takes away your outer garment, do not withhold even the undergarment.
30  Give to everyone asking you, and from the one taking your things away do not ask [them] back.
31  “Also, just as YOU want men to do to YOU, do the same way to them.
32  “And if YOU love those loving YOU, of what credit is it to YOU? For even the sinners love those loving them.
33  And if YOU do good to those doing good to YOU, really of what credit is it to YOU? Even the sinners do the same.
34  Also, if YOU lend [without interest] to those from whom YOU hope to receive, of what credit is it to YOU? Even sinners lend [without interest] to sinners that they may get back as much.
35  To the contrary, continue to love YOUR enemies and to do good and to lend [without interest], not hoping for anything back;  and YOUR reward will be great, and YOU will be sons of the Most High, because he is kind toward the unthankful and wicked.
36  Continue becoming merciful, just as YOUR Father is merciful.
37  “Moreover, stop judging, and YOU will by no means be judged;  and stop condemning, and YOU will by no means be condemned. Keep on releasing, and YOU will be released.
38  Practice giving, and people will give to YOU. They will pour into YOUR laps a fine measure, pressed down, shaken together and overflowing. For with the measure that YOU are measuring out, they will measure out to YOU in return.”
39  Then he also spoke an illustration to them: “A blind man cannot guide a blind man, can he? Both will tumble into a pit, will they not?
40  A pupil is not above his teacher, but everyone that is perfectly instructed will be like his teacher.
41  Why, then, do you look at the straw that is in your brother’s eye, but do not observe the rafter that is in your own eye?
42  How can you say to your brother, ‘Brother, allow me to extract the straw that is in your eye,’ while you yourself are not looking at the rafter in that eye of yours? Hypocrite! First extract the rafter from your own eye, and then you will see clearly how to extract the straw that is in your brother’s eye.
43  “For there is not a fine tree producing rotten fruit;  again there is not a rotten tree producing fine fruit.
44  For each tree is known by its own fruit. For example, people do not gather figs from thorns, nor do they cut grapes off a thornbush.
45  A good man brings forth good out of the good treasure of his heart, but a wicked man brings forth what is wicked out of his wicked [treasure];  for out of the heart’s abundance his mouth speaks.
46  “Why, then, do YOU call me ‘Lord! Lord!’ but do not do the things I say?
47  Everyone that comes to me and hears my words and does them, I will show YOU whom he is like:
48  He is like a man building a house, who dug and went down deep and laid a foundation upon the rock-mass. Consequently, when a flood arose, the river dashed against that house, but was not strong enough to shake it, because of its being well built.
49  On the other hand, he who hears and does not do, is like a man who built a house upon the ground without a foundation. Against it the river dashed, and immediately it collapsed, and the ruin of that house became great.”
luke 7
7  When he had completed all his sayings in the hearing of the people, he entered into Capernaum.
2  Now a certain army officer’s slave, who was dear to him, was ailing and was about to pass away.
3  When he heard about Jesus, he sent forth older men of the Jews to him to ask him to come and bring his slave safely through.
4  Then those that came up to Jesus began to entreat him earnestly, saying: “He is worthy of your conferring this upon him,
5  for he loves our nation and he himself built the synagogue for us.”
6  So Jesus started off with them. But when he was not far from the house, the army officer had already sent friends to say to him: “Sir, do not bother, for I am not fit to have you come in under my roof.
7  For that reason I did not consider myself worthy to come to you. But say the word, and let my servant be healed.
8  For I too am a man placed under authority, having soldiers under me, and I say to this one, ‘Be on your way!’ and he is on his way, and to another, ‘Come!’ and he comes, and to my slave, ‘Do this!’ and he does it.”
9  Well, when Jesus heard these things he marveled at him, and he turned to the crowd following him and said: “I tell YOU, Not even in Israel have I found so great a faith.”
10  And those that had been sent, on getting back to the house, found the slave in good health.
11  Closely following this he traveled to a city called Nain, and his disciples and a great crowd were traveling with him.
12  As he got near the gate of the city, why, look! there was a dead man being carried out, the only-begotten son of his mother. Besides, she was a widow. A considerable crowd from the city was also with her.
13  And when the Lord caught sight of her, he was moved with pity for her, and he said to her: “Stop weeping.”
14  With that he approached and touched the bier, and the bearers stood still, and he said: “Young man, I say to you, Get up!”
15  And the dead man sat up and started to speak, and he gave him to his mother.
16  Now fear seized them all, and they began to glorify God, saying: “A great prophet has been raised up among us,” and, “God has turned his attention to his people.”
17  And this news concerning him spread out into all Judea and all the surrounding country.
18  Now John’s disciples reported to him about all these things.
19  So John summoned a certain two of his disciples and sent them to the Lord to say: “Are you the Coming One or are we to expect a different one?”
20  When they came up to him the men said: “John the Baptist dispatched us to you to say, ‘Are you the Coming One or are we to expect another?’”
21  In that hour he cured many of sicknesses and grievous diseases and wicked spirits, and granted many blind persons the favor of seeing.
22  Hence in answer he said to the [two]: “Go YOUR way, report to John what YOU saw and heard: the blind are receiving sight, the lame are walking, the lepers are being cleansed and the deaf are hearing, the dead are being raised up, the poor are being told the good news.
23  And happy is he who has not stumbled over me.”
24  When the messengers of John had gone away, he started to say to the crowds concerning John: “What did YOU go out into the wilderness to behold? A reed being tossed by the wind?
25  What, then, did YOU go out to see? A man dressed in soft outer garments? Why, those in splendid dress and existing in luxury are in royal houses.
26  Really, then, what did YOU go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell YOU, and far more than a prophet.
27  This is he concerning whom it is written, ‘Look! I am sending forth my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way ahead of you.’
28  I tell YOU, Among those born of women there is none greater than John;  but a person that is a lesser one in the kingdom of God is greater than he is.”
29  (And all the people and the tax collectors, when they heard [this], declared God to be righteous, they having been baptized with the baptism of John.
30  But the Pharisees and those versed in the Law disregarded the counsel of God to them, they not having been baptized by him.)
31  “With whom, therefore, shall I compare the men of this generation, and whom are they like?
32  They are like young children sitting in a marketplace and crying out to one another, and who say, ‘We played the flute for YOU, but YOU did not dance;  we wailed, but YOU did not weep.’
33  Correspondingly, John the Baptist has come neither eating bread nor drinking wine, but YOU say, ‘He has a demon.’
34  The Son of man has come eating and drinking, but YOU say, ‘Look! A man gluttonous and given to drinking wine, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’
35  All the same, wisdom is proved righteous by all its children.”
36  Now a certain one of the Pharisees kept asking him to dine with him. Accordingly he entered into the house of the Pharisee and reclined at the table.
37  And, look! a woman who was known in the city to be a sinner learned that he was reclining at a meal in the house of the Pharisee, and she brought an alabaster case of perfumed oil,
38  and, taking a position behind at his feet, she wept and started to wet his feet with her tears and she would wipe them off with the hair of her head. Also, she tenderly kissed his feet and greased them with the perfumed oil.
39  At the sight the Pharisee that invited him said within himself: “This man, if he were a prophet, would know who and what kind of woman it is that is touching him, that she is a sinner.”
40  But in reply Jesus said to him: “Simon, I have something to say to you.” He said: “Teacher, say it!”
41  “Two men were debtors to a certain lender;  the one was in debt for five hundred denarii, but the other for fifty.
42  When they did not have anything with which to pay back, he freely forgave them both. Therefore, which of them will love him the more?”
43  In answer Simon said: “I suppose it is the one to whom he freely forgave the more.” He said to him: “You judged correctly.”
44  With that he turned to the woman and said to Simon: “Do you behold this woman? I entered into your house;  you gave me no water for my feet. But this woman wet my feet with her tears and wiped them off with her hair.
45  You gave me no kiss;  but this woman, from the hour that I came in, did not leave off tenderly kissing my feet.
46  You did not grease my head with oil;  but this woman greased my feet with perfumed oil.
47  By virtue of this, I tell you, her sins, many though they are, are forgiven, because she loved much;  but he who is forgiven little, loves little.”
48  Then he said to her: “Your sins are forgiven.”
49  At this those reclining at the table with him started to say within themselves: “Who is this man who even forgives sins?”
50  But he said to the woman: “Your faith has saved you;  go your way in peace.”
luke 8
8  Shortly afterwards he went journeying from city to city and from village to village, preaching and declaring the good news of the kingdom of God. And the twelve were with him,
2  and certain women that had been cured of wicked spirits and sicknesses, Mary the so-called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had come out,
3  and Joanna the wife of Chuza, Herod’s man in charge, and Susanna and many other women, who were ministering to them from their belongings.
4  Now when a great crowd had collected together with those that went to him from city after city, he spoke by means of an illustration:
5  “A sower went out to sow his seed. Well, as he was sowing, some of it fell alongside the road and was trampled down, and the birds of heaven ate it up.
6  Some other landed upon the rock-mass, and, after sprouting, it dried up because of not having moisture.
7  Some other fell among the thorns, and the thorns that grew up with it choked it off.
8  Some other fell upon the good soil, and, after sprouting, it produced fruit a hundredfold.” As he told these things, he proceeded to call out: “Let him that has ears to listen, listen.”
9  But his disciples began to ask him what this illustration might mean.
10  He said: “To YOU it is granted to understand the sacred secrets of the kingdom of God, but for the rest it is in illustrations, in order that, though looking, they may look in vain and, though hearing, they may not get the meaning.
11  Now the illustration means this: The seed is the word of God.
12  Those alongside the road are the ones that have heard, then the Devil comes and takes the word away from their hearts in order that they may not believe and be saved.
13  Those upon the rock-mass are the ones who, when they hear it, receive the word with joy, but these have no root;  they believe for a season, but in a season of testing they fall away.
14  As for that which fell among the thorns, these are the ones that have heard, but, by being carried away by anxieties and riches and pleasures of this life, they are completely choked and bring nothing to perfection.
15  As for that on the fine soil, these are the ones that, after hearing the word with a fine and good heart, retain it and bear fruit with endurance.
16  “No one, after lighting a lamp, covers it with a vessel or puts it underneath a bed, but he puts it on a lampstand, that those stepping in may behold the light.
17  For there is nothing hidden that will not become manifest, neither anything carefully concealed that will never become known and never come into the open.
18  Therefore, pay attention to how YOU listen;  for whoever has, more will be given him, but whoever does not have, even what he imagines he has will be taken away from him.”
19  Now his mother and brothers came toward him, but they were unable to get to him because of the crowd.
20  However, it was reported to him: “Your mother and your brothers are standing outside wanting to see you.”
21  In reply he said to them: “My mother and my brothers are these who hear the word of God and do it.”
22  In the course of one of the days he and his disciples got into a boat, and he said to them: “Let us cross to the other side of the lake.” So they set sail.
23  But as they were sailing he fell asleep. Now a violent windstorm descended upon the lake, and they began to fill up with [water] and to be in danger.
24  Finally they went to him and roused him, saying: “Instructor, Instructor, we are about to perish!” Rousing himself, he rebuked the wind and the raging of the water, and they subsided, and a calm set in.
25  Then he said to them: “Where is YOUR faith?” But struck with fear, they marveled, saying to one another: “Who really is this, for he orders even the winds and the water, and they obey him?”
26  And they put in to shore in the country of the Gerasenes, which is on the side opposite Galilee.
27  But as he got out onto land a certain man from the city who had demons met him. And for a considerable time he had not worn clothing, and he was staying, not at home, but among the tombs.
28  At the sight of Jesus he cried aloud and fell down before him, and with a loud voice he said: “What have I to do with you, Jesus Son of the Most High God? I beg you, do not torment me.”
29  (For he had been ordering the unclean spirit to come out of the man. For over a long time it had held him fast, and he was repeatedly bound with chains and fetters under guard, but he would burst the bonds and be driven by the demon into the lonely places.)
30  Jesus asked him: “What is your name?” He said: “Legion,” because many demons had entered into him.
31  And they kept entreating him not to order them to go away into the abyss.
32  Now a herd of a considerable number of swine was feeding there on the mountain;  so they entreated him to permit them to enter into those. And he gave them permission.
33  Then the demons went out of the man and entered into the swine, and the herd rushed over the precipice into the lake and drowned.
34  But when the herders saw what had happened, they fled and reported it to the city and to the countryside.
35  Then people turned out to see what had happened, and they came to Jesus and found the man from whom the demons came out, clothed and in his sound mind, sitting at the feet of Jesus;  and they became fearful.
36  Those who had seen it reported to them how the demon-possessed man had been made well.
37  So all the multitude from the surrounding country of the Gerasenes asked him to get away from them, because they were in the grip of great fear. Then he went aboard the boat and turned away.
38  However, the man from whom the demons had gone out kept begging to continue with him;  but he dismissed the man, saying:
39  “Be on your way back home, and keep on relating what things God did for you.” Accordingly he went away, proclaiming throughout the whole city what things Jesus did for him.
40  When Jesus got back, the crowd received him kindly, for they were all expecting him.
41  But, look! a man named Jairus came, and this man was a presiding officer of the synagogue. And he fell at the feet of Jesus and began to entreat him to enter into his house,
42  because he had an only-begotten daughter about twelve years old and she was dying. As he was going the crowds thronged him.
43  And a woman, subject to a flow of blood for twelve years, who had not been able to get a cure from anyone,
44  approached from behind and touched the fringe of his outer garment, and instantly her flow of blood stopped.
45  So Jesus said: “Who was it that touched me?” When they were all denying it, Peter said: “Instructor, the crowds are hemming you in and closely pressing you.”
46  Yet Jesus said: “Someone touched me, for I perceived that power went out of me.”
47  Seeing that she had not escaped notice, the woman came trembling and fell down before him and disclosed before all the people the cause for which she touched him and how she was healed instantly.
48  But he said to her: “Daughter, your faith has made you well;  go your way in peace.”
49  While he was yet speaking, a certain representative of the presiding officer of the synagogue came, saying: “Your daughter has died;  do not bother the teacher any longer.”
50  On hearing this, Jesus answered him: “Have no fear, only put forth faith, and she will be saved.”
51  When he reached the house he did not let anyone go in with him except Peter and John and James and the girl’s father and mother.
52  But people were all weeping and beating themselves in grief for her. So he said: “STOP weeping, for she did not die but is sleeping.”
53  At this they began to laugh at him scornfully, because they knew she had died.
54  But he took her by the hand and called, saying: “Girl, get up!”
55  And her spirit returned, and she rose instantly, and he ordered something to be given her to eat.
56  Well, her parents were beside themselves;  but he instructed them to tell no one what had happened.
luke 9
9  Then he called the twelve together and gave them power and authority over all the demons and to cure sicknesses.
2  And so he sent them forth to preach the kingdom of God and to heal,
3  and he said to them: “Carry nothing for the trip, neither staff nor food pouch, nor bread nor silver money;  neither have two undergarments.
4  But wherever YOU enter into a home, stay there and leave from there.
5  And wherever people do not receive YOU, on going out of that city shake the dust off YOUR feet for a witness against them.”
6  Then starting out they went through the territory from village to village, declaring the good news and performing cures everywhere.
7  Now Herod the district ruler heard of all the things happening, and he was in great perplexity because of its being said by some that John had been raised up from the dead,
8  but by others that Elijah had appeared, but by still others that a certain one of the ancient prophets had risen.
9  Herod said: “John I beheaded. Who, then, is this about whom I am hearing such things?” So he was seeking to see him.
10  And when the apostles returned they recounted to him what things they had done. With that he took them along and withdrew to privacy into a city called Bethsaida.
11  But the crowds, getting to know it, followed him. And he received them kindly and began to speak to them about the kingdom of God, and he healed those needing a cure.
12  Then the day started to decline. The twelve now came up and said to him: “Dismiss the crowd, that they may go into the villages and countryside round about and procure lodging and find provisions, because out here we are in a lonely place.”
13  But he said to them: “YOU give them something to eat.” They said: “We have nothing more than five loaves and two fishes, unless perhaps we ourselves go and buy foodstuffs for all these people.”
14  They were, in fact, about five thousand men. But he said to his disciples: “Have them recline as at meals, in groups of about fifty each.”
15  And they did so and had them all recline.
16  Then taking the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked up to heaven, blessed them and broke them up and began to give them to the disciples to set before the crowd.
17  So they all ate and were satisfied, and the surplus that they had was taken up, twelve baskets of fragments.
18  Later, while he was praying alone, the disciples came together to him, and he questioned them, saying: “Who are the crowds saying that I am?”
19  In reply they said: “John the Baptist;  but others, Elijah, and still others, that one of the ancient prophets has risen.”
20  Then he said to them: “YOU, though, who do YOU say I am?” Peter said in reply: “The Christ of God.”
21  Then in a stern talk to them he instructed them not to be telling this to anybody,
22  but said: “The Son of man must undergo many sufferings and be rejected by the older men and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and on the third day be raised up.”
23  Then he went on to say to all: “If anyone wants to come after me, let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake day after day and follow me continually.
24  For whoever wants to save his soul will lose it;  but whoever loses his soul for my sake is the one that will save it.
25  Really, what does a man benefit himself if he gains the whole world but loses his own self or suffers damage?
26  For whoever becomes ashamed of me and of my words, the Son of man will be ashamed of this one when he arrives in his glory and that of the Father and of the holy angels.
27  But I tell YOU truthfully, There are some of those standing here that will not taste death at all until first they see the kingdom of God.”
28  In actual fact, about eight days after these words, he took Peter and John and James along and climbed up into the mountain to pray.
29  And as he was praying the appearance of his face became different and his apparel became glitteringly white.
30  Also, look! two men were conversing with him, who were Moses and Elijah.
31  These appeared with glory and began talking about his departure that he was destined to fulfill at Jerusalem.
32  Now Peter and those with him were weighed down with sleep;  but when they got fully awake they saw his glory and the two men standing with him.
33  And as these were being separated from him, Peter said to Jesus: “Instructor, it is fine for us to be here, so let us erect three tents, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah,” he not realizing what he was saying.
34  But as he was saying these things a cloud formed and began to overshadow them. As they entered into the cloud, they became fearful.
35  And a voice came out of the cloud, saying: “This is my Son, the one that has been chosen. Listen to him.”
36  And as the voice occurred Jesus was found alone. But they kept quiet and did not report to anyone in those days any of the things they saw.
37  On the succeeding day, when they got down from the mountain, a great crowd met him.
38  And, look! a man cried out from the crowd, saying: “Teacher, I beg you to take a look at my son, because he is my only-begotten,
39  and, look! a spirit takes him, and suddenly he cries out, and it throws him into convulsions with foam, and it scarcely withdraws from him after bruising him.
40  And I begged your disciples to expel it, but they could not.”
41  In response Jesus said: “O faithless and twisted generation, how long must I continue with YOU and put up with YOU? Lead your son over here.”
42  But even as he was approaching, the demon dashed him to the ground and violently convulsed him. However, Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit and healed the boy and delivered him to his father.
43  Well, they all began to be astounded at the majestic power of God. Now as they were all marveling at all the things he was doing, he said to his disciples:
44  “Give lodgment to these words in YOUR ears, for the Son of man is destined to be delivered into the hands of men.”
45  But they continued without understanding of this saying. In fact, it was concealed from them that they might not see through it, and they were afraid to question him about this saying.
46  Then a reasoning entered among them as to who would be the greatest of them.
47  Jesus, knowing the reasoning of their hearts, took a young child, set it beside him
48  and said to them: “Whoever receives this young child on the basis of my name receives me [too], and whoever receives me receives him [also] that sent me forth. For he that conducts himself as a lesser one among all of YOU is the one that is great.”
49  In response John said: “Instructor, we saw a certain man expelling demons by the use of your name and we tried to prevent him, because he is not following with us.”
50  But Jesus said to him: “Do not YOU men try to prevent [him], for he that is not against YOU is for YOU.”
51  As the days were now coming to the full for him to be taken up, he firmly set his face to go to Jerusalem.
52  So he sent forth messengers in advance of him. And they went their way and entered into a village of Samaritans, to make preparation for him; 
53  but they did not receive him, because his face was set for going to Jerusalem.
54  When the disciples James and John saw this they said: “Lord, do you want us to tell fire to come down from heaven and annihilate them?”
55  But he turned and rebuked them.
56  So they went to a different village.
57  Now as they were going on the road, someone said to him: “I will follow you to wherever you may depart.”
58  And Jesus said to him: “Foxes have dens and birds of heaven have roosts, but the Son of man has nowhere to lay down his head.”
59  Then he said to another: “Be my follower.” The man said: “Permit me first to leave and bury my father.”
60  But he said to him: “Let the dead bury their dead, but you go away and declare abroad the kingdom of God.”
61  And still another said: “I will follow you, Lord;  but first permit me to say good-bye to those in my household.”
62  Jesus said to him: “No man that has put his hand to a plow and looks at the things behind is well fitted for the kingdom of God.”
luke 10
10  After these things the Lord designated seventy others and sent them forth by twos in advance of him into every city and place to which he himself was going to come.
2  Then he began to say to them: “The harvest, indeed, is great, but the workers are few. Therefore beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.
3  Go forth. Look! I am sending YOU forth as lambs in among wolves.
4  Do not carry a purse, nor a food pouch, nor sandals, and do not embrace anybody in greeting along the road.
5  Wherever YOU enter into a house say first, ‘May this house have peace.’
6  And if a friend of peace is there, YOUR peace will rest upon him. But if there is not, it will turn back to YOU.
7  So stay in that house, eating and drinking the things they provide, for the worker is worthy of his wages. Do not be transferring from house to house.
8  “Also, wherever YOU enter into a city and they receive YOU, eat the things set before YOU,
9  and cure the sick ones in it, and go on telling them, ‘The kingdom of God has come near to YOU.’
10  But wherever YOU enter into a city and they do not receive YOU, go out into its broad ways and say,
11  ‘Even the dust that got stuck to our feet from YOUR city we wipe off against YOU. Nevertheless, keep this in mind, that the kingdom of God has come near.’
12  I tell YOU that it will be more endurable for Sodom in that day than for that city.
13  “Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! because if the powerful works that have taken place in YOU had taken place in Tyre and Sidon, they would long ago have repented sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
14  Consequently it will be more endurable for Tyre and Sidon in the judgment than for YOU.
15  And you, Capernaum, will you perhaps be exalted to heaven? Down to Hades you will come!
16  “He that listens to YOU listens to me [too]. And he that disregards YOU disregards me [too]. Moreover, he that disregards me disregards [also] him that sent me forth.”
17  Then the seventy returned with joy, saying: “Lord, even the demons are made subject to us by the use of your name.”
18  At that he said to them: “I began to behold Satan already fallen like lightning from heaven.
19  Look! I have given YOU the authority to trample underfoot serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing will by any means do YOU hurt.
20  Nevertheless, do not rejoice over this, that the spirits are made subject to YOU, but rejoice because YOUR names have been inscribed in the heavens.”
21  In that very hour he became overjoyed in the holy spirit and said: “I publicly praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have carefully hidden these things from wise and intellectual ones, and have revealed them to babes. Yes, O Father, because to do thus came to be the way approved by you.
22  All things have been delivered to me by my Father, and who the Son is no one knows but the Father;  and who the Father is, no one [knows] but the Son, and he to whom the Son is willing to reveal him.”
23  With that he turned to the disciples by themselves and said: “Happy are the eyes that behold the things YOU are beholding.
24  For I say to YOU, Many prophets and kings desired to see the things YOU are beholding but did not see them, and to hear the things YOU are hearing but did not hear them.”
25  Now, look! a certain man versed in the Law rose up, to test him out, and said: “Teacher, by doing what shall I inherit everlasting life?”
26  He said to him: “What is written in the Law? How do you read?”
27  In answer he said: “‘You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole strength and with your whole mind,’ and, ‘your neighbor as yourself.’”
28  He said to him: “You answered correctly;  ‘keep on doing this and you will get life.’”
29  But, wanting to prove himself righteous, the man said to Jesus: “Who really is my neighbor?”
30  In reply Jesus said: “A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho and fell among robbers, who both stripped him and inflicted blows, and went off, leaving him half-dead.
31  Now, by coincidence, a certain priest was going down over that road, but, when he saw him, he went by on the opposite side.
32  Likewise, a Levite also, when he got down to the place and saw him, went by on the opposite side.
33  But a certain Samaritan traveling the road came upon him and, at seeing him, he was moved with pity.
34  So he approached him and bound up his wounds, pouring oil and wine upon them. Then he mounted him upon his own beast and brought him to an inn and took care of him.
35  And the next day he took out two denarii, gave them to the innkeeper, and said, ‘Take care of him, and whatever you spend besides this, I will repay you when I come back here.’
36  Who of these three seems to you to have made himself neighbor to the man that fell among the robbers?”
37  He said: “The one that acted mercifully toward him.” Jesus then said to him: “Go your way and be doing the same yourself.”
38  Now as they were going their way he entered into a certain village. Here a certain woman named Martha received him as guest into the house.
39  This woman also had a sister called Mary, who, however, sat down at the feet of the Lord and kept listening to his word.
40  Martha, on the other hand, was distracted with attending to many duties. So, she came near and said: “Lord, does it not matter to you that my sister has left me alone to attend to things? Tell her, therefore, to join in helping me.”
41  In answer the Lord said to her: “Martha, Martha, you are anxious and disturbed about many things.
42  A few things, though, are needed, or just one. For her part, Mary chose the good portion, and it will not be taken away from her.”
luke 11
11  Now on the occasion of his being in a certain place praying, when he stopped, a certain one of his disciples said to him: “Lord, teach us how to pray, just as John also taught his disciples.”
2  Then he said to them: “Whenever YOU pray, say, ‘Father, let your name be sanctified. Let your kingdom come.
3  Give us our bread for the day according to the day’s requirement.
4  And forgive us our sins, for we ourselves also forgive everyone that is in debt to us;  and do not bring us into temptation.’”
5  Further, he said to them: “Who of YOU will have a friend and will go to him at midnight and say to him, ‘Friend, loan me three loaves,
6  because a friend of mine has just come to me on a journey and I have nothing to set before him’?
7  And that one from inside says in reply, ‘Quit making me trouble. The door is already locked, and my young children are with me in bed;  I cannot rise up and give you anything.’
8  I tell YOU, Although he will not rise up and give him anything because of being his friend, certainly because of his bold persistence he will get up and give him what things he needs.
9  Accordingly I say to YOU, Keep on asking, and it will be given YOU;  keep on seeking, and YOU will find;  keep on knocking, and it will be opened to YOU.
10  For everyone asking receives, and everyone seeking finds, and to everyone knocking it will be opened.
11  Indeed, which father is there among YOU who, if his son asks for a fish, will perhaps hand him a serpent instead of a fish?
12  Or if he also asks for an egg, will hand him a scorpion?
13  Therefore, if YOU, although being wicked, know how to give good gifts to YOUR children, how much more so will the Father in heaven give holy spirit to those asking him!”
14  Later he was expelling a dumb demon. After the demon came out, the dumb man spoke. And the crowds marveled.
15  But certain ones of them said: “He expels the demons by means of Beelzebub the ruler of the demons.”
16  However, others, to tempt him, began seeking a sign out of heaven from him.
17  Knowing their imaginations he said to them: “Every kingdom divided against itself comes to desolation, and a house [divided] against itself falls.
18  So if Satan is also divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? Because YOU say I expel the demons by means of Beelzebub.
19  If it is by means of Beelzebub I expel the demons, by whom do YOUR sons expel them? Because of this they will be judges of YOU.
20  But if it is by means of God’s finger I expel the demons, the kingdom of God has really overtaken YOU.
21  When a strong man, well armed, guards his palace, his belongings continue in peace.
22  But when someone stronger than he is comes against him and conquers him, he takes away his full armament in which he was trusting, and he divides out the things he despoiled him of.
23  He that is not on my side is against me, and he that does not gather with me scatters.
24  “When an unclean spirit comes out of a man, it passes through parched places in search of a resting-place, and, after finding none, it says, ‘I will return to my house out of which I moved.’
25  And on arriving it finds it swept clean and adorned.
26  Then it goes its way and takes along seven different spirits more wicked than itself, and, after getting inside, they dwell there;  and the final circumstances of that man become worse than the first.”
27  Now as he was saying these things a certain woman out of the crowd raised her voice and said to him: “Happy is the womb that carried you and the breasts that you sucked!”
28  But he said: “No, rather, Happy are those hearing the word of God and keeping it!”
29  When the crowds were massing together, he started to say: “This generation is a wicked generation;  it looks for a sign. But no sign will be given it except the sign of Jonah.
30  For just as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites, in the same way will the Son of man be also to this generation.
31  The queen of the south will be raised up in the judgment with the men of this generation and will condemn them;  because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, but, look! something more than Solomon is here.
32  The men of Nineveh will rise in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it;  because they repented at what Jonah preached;  but, look! something more than Jonah is here.
33  After lighting a lamp, a person puts it, not in a vault nor under a measuring basket, but upon the lampstand, that those stepping in may behold the light.
34  The lamp of the body is your eye. When your eye is simple, your whole body is also bright;  but when it is wicked, your body is also dark.
35  Be alert, therefore. Perhaps the light that is in you is darkness.
36  Therefore, if your whole body is bright with no part at all dark, it will all be as bright as when a lamp gives you light by its rays.”
37  When he had spoken this, a Pharisee requested him to dine with him. So he went in and reclined at the table.
38  However, the Pharisee was surprised at seeing that he did not first wash before the dinner.
39  But the Lord said to him: “Now YOU Pharisees, YOU cleanse the outside of the cup and dish, but the inside of YOU is full of plunder and wickedness.
40  Unreasonable persons! He that made the outside made also the inside, did he not?
41  Nevertheless, give as gifts of mercy the things that are inside, and, look! all [other] things are clean about YOU.
42  But woe to YOU Pharisees, because YOU give the tenth of the mint and the rue and of every [other] vegetable, but YOU pass by the justice and the love of God! These things YOU were under obligation to do, but those other things not to omit.
43  Woe to YOU Pharisees, because YOU love the front seats in the synagogues and the greetings in the marketplaces!
44  Woe to YOU, because YOU are as those memorial tombs which are not in evidence, so that men walk upon them and do not know [it]!”
45  In answer a certain one of those versed in the Law said to him: “Teacher, in saying these things you also insult us.”
46  Then he said: “Woe also to YOU who are versed in the Law, because YOU load men with loads hard to be borne, but YOU yourselves do not touch the loads with one of YOUR fingers!
47  “Woe to YOU, because YOU build the memorial tombs of the prophets, but YOUR forefathers killed them!
48  Certainly YOU are witnesses of the deeds of YOUR forefathers and yet YOU give consent to them, because these killed the prophets but YOU are building [their tombs].
49  On this account the wisdom of God also said, ‘I will send forth to them prophets and apostles, and they will kill and persecute some of them,
50  so that the blood of all the prophets spilled from the founding of the world may be required from this generation,
51  from the blood of Abel down to the blood of Zechariah, who was slain between the altar and the house.’ Yes, I tell YOU, it will be required from this generation.
52  “Woe to YOU who are versed in the Law, because YOU took away the key of knowledge;  YOU yourselves did not go in, and those going in YOU hindered!”
53  So when he went out from there the scribes and the Pharisees started in to press upon him terribly and to ply him with questions about further things,
54  lying in wait for him, to catch something out of his mouth.
luke 12
12  In the meantime, when the crowd had gathered together in so many thousands that they were stepping upon one another, he started out by saying first to his disciples: “Watch out for the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
2  But there is nothing carefully concealed that will not be revealed, and secret that will not become known.
3  Wherefore what things YOU say in the darkness will be heard in the light, and what YOU whisper in private rooms will be preached from the housetops.
4  Moreover, I say to YOU, my friends, Do not fear those who kill the body and after this are not able to do anything more.
5  But I will indicate to YOU whom to fear: Fear him who after killing has authority to throw into Gehenna. Yes, I tell YOU, fear this One.
6  Five sparrows sell for two coins of small value, do they not? Yet not one of them goes forgotten before God.
7  But even the hairs of YOUR heads are all numbered. Have no fear;  YOU are worth more than many sparrows.
8  “I say, then, to YOU, Everyone that confesses union with me before men, the Son of man will also confess union with him before the angels of God.
9  But he that disowns me before men will be disowned before the angels of God.
10  And everyone that says a word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven him;  but he that blasphemes against the holy spirit will not be forgiven it.
11  But when they bring YOU in before public assemblies and government officials and authorities, do not become anxious about how or what YOU will speak in defense or what YOU will say; 
12  for the holy spirit will teach YOU in that very hour the things YOU ought to say.”
13  Then a certain one of the crowd said to him: “Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me.”
14  He said to him: “Man, who appointed me judge or apportioner over YOU persons?”
15  Then he said to them: “Keep YOUR eyes open and guard against every sort of covetousness, because even when a person has an abundance his life does not result from the things he possesses.”
16  With that he spoke an illustration to them, saying: “The land of a certain rich man produced well.
17  Consequently he began reasoning within himself, saying, ‘What shall I do, now that I have nowhere to gather my crops?’
18  So he said, ‘I will do this: I will tear down my storehouses and build bigger ones, and there I will gather all my grain and all my good things; 
19  and I will say to my soul: “Soul, you have many good things laid up for many years;  take your ease, eat, drink, enjoy yourself.”’
20  But God said to him, ‘Unreasonable one, this night they are demanding your soul from you. Who, then, is to have the things you stored up?’
21  So it goes with the man that lays up treasure for himself but is not rich toward God.”
22  Then he said to his disciples: “On this account I say to YOU, Quit being anxious about YOUR souls as to what YOU will eat or about YOUR bodies as to what YOU will wear.
23  For the soul is worth more than food and the body than clothing.
24  Mark well that the ravens neither sow seed nor reap, and they have neither barn nor storehouse, and yet God feeds them. Of how much more worth are YOU than birds?
25  Who of YOU by being anxious can add a cubit to his life span?
26  If, therefore, YOU cannot do the least thing, why be anxious about the remaining things?
27  Mark well how the lilies grow;  they neither toil nor spin;  but I tell YOU, Not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these.
28  If, now, God thus clothes the vegetation in the field that today exists and tomorrow is cast into an oven, how much rather will he clothe YOU, YOU with little faith!
29  So quit seeking what YOU might eat and what YOU might drink, and quit being in anxious suspense; 
30  for all these are the things the nations of the world are eagerly pursuing, but YOUR Father knows YOU need these things.
31  Nevertheless, seek continually his kingdom, and these things will be added to YOU.
32  “Have no fear, little flock, because YOUR Father has approved of giving YOU the kingdom.
33  Sell the things belonging to YOU and give gifts of mercy. Make purses for yourselves that do not wear out, a never-failing treasure in the heavens, where a thief does not get near nor moth consumes.
34  For where YOUR treasure is, there YOUR hearts will be also.
35  “Let YOUR loins be girded and YOUR lamps be burning,
36  and YOU yourselves be like men waiting for their master when he returns from the marriage, so that at his arriving and knocking they may at once open to him.
37  Happy are those slaves whom the master on arriving finds watching! Truly I say to YOU, He will gird himself and make them recline at the table and will come alongside and minister to them.
38  And if he arrives in the second watch, even if in the third, and finds them thus, happy are they!
39  But know this, that if the householder had known at what hour the thief would come, he would have kept watching and not have let his house be broken into.
40  YOU also, keep ready, because at an hour that YOU do not think likely the Son of man is coming.”
41  Then Peter said: “Lord, are you saying this illustration to us or also to all?”
42  And the Lord said: “Who really is the faithful steward, the discreet one, whom his master will appoint over his body of attendants to keep giving them their measure of food supplies at the proper time?
43  Happy is that slave, if his master on arriving finds him doing so!
44  I tell YOU truthfully, He will appoint him over all his belongings.
45  But if ever that slave should say in his heart, ‘My master delays coming,’ and should start to beat the menservants and the maidservants, and to eat and drink and get drunk,
46  the master of that slave will come on a day that he is not expecting [him] and in an hour that he does not know, and he will punish him with the greatest severity and assign him a part with the unfaithful ones.
47  Then that slave that understood the will of his master but did not get ready or do in line with his will will be beaten with many strokes.
48  But the one that did not understand and so did things deserving of strokes will be beaten with few. Indeed, everyone to whom much was given, much will be demanded of him;  and the one whom people put in charge of much, they will demand more than usual of him.
49  “I came to start a fire on the earth, and what more is there for me to wish if it has already been lighted?
50  Indeed, I have a baptism with which to be baptized, and how I am being distressed until it is finished!
51  Do YOU imagine I came to give peace on the earth? No, indeed, I tell YOU, but rather division.
52  For from now on there will be five in one house divided, three against two and two against three.
53  They will be divided, father against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against [her] mother, mother-in-law against [her] daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law against [her] mother-in-law.”
54  Then he went on to say also to the crowds: “When YOU see a cloud rising in western parts, at once YOU say, ‘A storm is coming,’ and it turns out so.
55  And when YOU see that a south wind is blowing, YOU say, ‘There will be a heat wave,’ and it occurs.
56  Hypocrites, YOU know how to examine the outward appearance of earth and sky, but how is it YOU do not know how to examine this particular time?
57  Why do YOU not judge also for yourselves what is righteous?
58  For example, when you are going with your adversary at law to a ruler, get to work, while on the way, to rid yourself of the dispute with him, that he may never hale you before the judge, and the judge deliver you to the court officer, and the court officer throw you into prison.
59  I tell you, You will certainly not get out from there until you pay over the last small coin of very little value.”
luke 13
13  At that very season there were certain ones present that reported to him about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices.
2  So in reply he said to them: “Do YOU imagine that these Galileans were proved worse sinners than all other Galileans because they have suffered these things?
3  No, indeed, I tell YOU;  but, unless YOU repent, YOU will all likewise be destroyed.
4  Or those eighteen upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, thereby killing them, do YOU imagine that they were proved greater debtors than all other men inhabiting Jerusalem?
5  No, indeed, I tell YOU;  but, unless YOU repent, YOU will all be destroyed in the same way.”
6  Then he went on to tell this illustration: “A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came looking for fruit on it, but found none.
7  Then he said to the vinedresser, ‘Here it is three years that I have come looking for fruit on this fig tree, but have found none. Cut it down! Why really should it keep the ground useless?’
8  In reply he said to him, ‘Master, let it alone also this year, until I dig around it and put on manure; 
9  and if then it produces fruit in the future, [well and good];  but if not, you shall cut it down.’”
10  Now he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath.
11  And, look! a woman with a spirit of weakness for eighteen years, and she was bent double and was unable to raise herself up at all.
12  When he saw her, Jesus addressed her and said to her: “Woman, you are released from your weakness.”
13  And he laid his hands on her;  and instantly she straightened up, and began to glorify God.
14  But in response the presiding officer of the synagogue, indignant because Jesus did the cure on the sabbath, began to say to the crowd: “There are six days on which work ought to be done;  on them, therefore, come and be cured, and not on the sabbath day.”
15  However, the Lord answered him and said: “Hypocrites, does not each one of YOU on the sabbath untie his bull or his ass from the stall and lead it away to give it drink?
16  Was it not due, then, for this woman who is a daughter of Abraham, and whom Satan held bound, look! eighteen years, to be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day?”
17  Well, when he said these things, all his opposers began to feel shame;  but all the crowd began to rejoice at all the glorious things done by him.
18  Therefore he went on to say: “What is the kingdom of God like, and with what shall I compare it?
19  It is like a mustard grain that a man took and put in his garden, and it grew and became a tree, and the birds of heaven took up lodging in its branches.”
20  And again he said: “With what shall I compare the kingdom of God?
21  It is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three large measures of flour until the whole mass was fermented.”
22  And he journeyed through from city to city and from village to village, teaching and continuing on his journey to Jerusalem.
23  Now a certain man said to him: “Lord, are those who are being saved few?” He said to them:
24  “Exert yourselves vigorously to get in through the narrow door, because many, I tell YOU, will seek to get in but will not be able,
25  when once the householder has got up and locked the door, and YOU start to stand outside and to knock at the door, saying, ‘Sir, open to us.’ But in answer he will say to YOU, ‘I do not know where YOU are from.’
26  Then YOU will start saying, ‘We ate and drank in front of you, and you taught in our broad ways.’
27  But he will speak and say to YOU, ‘I do not know where YOU are from. Get away from me, all YOU workers of unrighteousness!’
28  There is where [YOUR] weeping and the gnashing of [YOUR] teeth will be, when YOU see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, but yourselves thrown outside.
29  Furthermore, people will come from eastern parts and western, and from north and south, and will recline at the table in the kingdom of God.
30  And, look! there are those last who will be first, and there are those first who will be last.”
31  In that very hour certain Pharisees came up, saying to him: “Get out and be on your way from here, because Herod wants to kill you.”
32  And he said to them: “Go and tell that fox, ‘Look! I am casting out demons and accomplishing healing today and tomorrow, and the third day I shall be finished.’
33  Nevertheless, I must go on my way today and tomorrow and the following day, because it is not admissible for a prophet to be destroyed outside of Jerusalem.
34  Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the killer of the prophets and stoner of those sent forth to her—how often I wanted to gather your children together in the manner that a hen gathers her brood of chicks under her wings, but YOU people did not want [it]!
35  Look! YOUR house is abandoned to YOU. I tell YOU, YOU will by no means see me until YOU say, ‘Blessed is he that comes in Jehovah’s name.’”
luke 14
14  And on an occasion when he went into the house of a certain one of the rulers of the Pharisees on the sabbath to eat a meal, they were closely watching him.
2  And, look! there was before him a certain man who had dropsy.
3  So in response Jesus spoke to those versed in the Law and to the Pharisees, saying: “Is it lawful on the sabbath to cure or not?”
4  But they kept silent. With that he took hold of [the man], healed him and sent [him] away.
5  And he said to them: “Who of YOU, if his son or bull falls into a well, will not immediately pull him out on the sabbath day?”
6  And they were not able to answer back on these things.
7  He then went on to tell the invited men an illustration, as he marked how they were choosing the most prominent places for themselves, saying to them:
8  “When you are invited by someone to a marriage feast, do not lie down in the most prominent place. Perhaps someone more distinguished than you may at the time have been invited by him,
9  and he that invited you and him will come and say to you, ‘Let this man have the place.’ And then you will start off with shame to occupy the lowest place.
10  But when you are invited, go and recline in the lowest place, that when the man that has invited you comes he will say to you, ‘Friend, go on up higher.’ Then you will have honor in front of all your fellow guests.
11  For everyone that exalts himself will be humbled and he that humbles himself will be exalted.”
12  Next he proceeded to say also to the man that invited him: “When you spread a dinner or evening meal, do not call your friends or your brothers or your relatives or rich neighbors. Perhaps sometime they might also invite you in return and it would become a repayment to you.
13  But when you spread a feast, invite poor people, crippled, lame, blind; 
14  and you will be happy, because they have nothing with which to repay you. For you will be repaid in the resurrection of the righteous ones.”
15  On hearing these things a certain one of the fellow guests said to him: “Happy is he who eats bread in the kingdom of God.”
16  [Jesus] said to him: “A certain man was spreading a grand evening meal, and he invited many.
17  And he sent his slave out at the hour of the evening meal to say to the invited ones, ‘Come, because things are now ready.’
18  But they all in common started to beg off. The first said to him, ‘I bought a field and need to go out and see it;  I ask you, Have me excused.’
19  And another said, ‘I bought five yoke of cattle and am going to examine them;  I ask you, Have me excused.’
20  Still another said, ‘I just married a wife and for this reason I cannot come.’
21  So the slave came up and reported these things to his master. Then the householder became wrathful and said to his slave, ‘Go out quickly into the broad ways and the lanes of the city, and bring in here the poor and crippled and blind and lame.’
22  In time the slave said, ‘Master, what you ordered has been done, and yet there is room.’
23  And the master said to the slave, ‘Go out into the roads and the fenced-in places, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.
24  For I say to YOU people, None of those men that were invited shall have a taste of my evening meal.’”
25  Now great crowds were traveling with him, and he turned and said to them:
26  “If anyone comes to me and does not hate his father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, yes, and even his own soul, he cannot be my disciple.
27  Whoever is not carrying his torture stake and coming after me cannot be my disciple.
28  For example, who of YOU that wants to build a tower does not first sit down and calculate the expense, to see if he has enough to complete it?
29  Otherwise, he might lay its foundation but not be able to finish it, and all the onlookers might start to ridicule him,
30  saying, ‘This man started to build but was not able to finish.’
31  Or what king, marching to meet another king in war, does not first sit down and take counsel whether he is able with ten thousand troops to cope with the one that comes against him with twenty thousand?
32  If, in fact, he cannot do so, then while that one is yet far away he sends out a body of ambassadors and sues for peace.
33  Thus, you may be sure, none of YOU that does not say good-bye to all his belongings can be my disciple.
34  “Salt, to be sure, is fine. But if even the salt loses its strength, with what will it be seasoned?
35  It is suitable neither for soil nor for manure. People throw it outside. Let him that has ears to listen, listen.”
luke 15
15  Now all the tax collectors and the sinners kept drawing near to him to hear him.
2  Consequently both the Pharisees and the scribes kept muttering, saying: “This man welcomes sinners and eats with them.”
3  Then he spoke this illustration to them, saying:
4  “What man of YOU with a hundred sheep, on losing one of them, will not leave the ninety-nine behind in the wilderness and go for the lost one until he finds it?
5  And when he has found it he puts it upon his shoulders and rejoices.
6  And when he gets home he calls his friends and his neighbors together, saying to them, ‘Rejoice with me, because I have found my sheep that was lost.’
7  I tell YOU that thus there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner that repents than over ninety-nine righteous ones who have no need of repentance.
8  “Or what woman with ten drachma coins, if she loses one drachma coin, does not light a lamp and sweep her house and search carefully until she finds it?
9  And when she has found it she calls the women who are her friends and neighbors together, saying, ‘Rejoice with me, because I have found the drachma coin that I lost.’
10  Thus, I tell YOU, joy arises among the angels of God over one sinner that repents.”
11  Then he said: “A certain man had two sons.
12  And the younger of them said to his father, ‘Father, give me the part of the property that falls to my share.’ Then he divided his means of living to them.
13  Later, after not many days, the younger son gathered all things together and traveled abroad into a distant country, and there squandered his property by living a debauched life.
14  When he had spent everything, a severe famine occurred throughout that country, and he started to be in need.
15  He even went and attached himself to one of the citizens of that country, and he sent him into his fields to herd swine.
16  And he used to desire to be filled with the carob pods which the swine were eating, and no one would give him [anything].
17  “When he came to his senses, he said, ‘How many hired men of my father are abounding with bread, while I am perishing here from famine!
18  I will rise and journey to my father and say to him: “Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you.
19  I am no longer worthy of being called your son. Make me as one of your hired men.”’
20  So he rose and went to his father. While he was yet a long way off, his father caught sight of him and was moved with pity, and he ran and fell upon his neck and tenderly kissed him.
21  Then the son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. I am no longer worthy of being called your son. Make me as one of your hired men.’
22  But the father said to his slaves, ‘Quick! bring out a robe, the best one, and clothe him with it, and put a ring on his hand and sandals on his feet.
23  And bring the fattened young bull, slaughter it and let us eat and enjoy ourselves,
24  because this my son was dead and came to life again;  he was lost and was found.’ And they started to enjoy themselves.
25  “Now his older son was in the field;  and as he came and got near the house he heard a music concert and dancing.
26  So he called one of the servants to him and inquired what these things meant.
27  He said to him, ‘Your brother has come, and your father slaughtered the fattened young bull, because he got him back in good health.’
28  But he became wrathful and was unwilling to go in. Then his father came out and began to entreat him.
29  In reply he said to his father, ‘Here it is so many years I have slaved for you and never once did I transgress your commandment, and yet to me you never once gave a kid for me to enjoy myself with my friends.
30  But as soon as this your son who ate up your means of living with harlots arrived, you slaughtered the fattened young bull for him.’
31  Then he said to him, ‘Child, you have always been with me, and all the things that are mine are yours; 
32  but we just had to enjoy ourselves and rejoice, because this your brother was dead and came to life, and he was lost and was found.’”
luke 16
16  Then he went on to say also to the disciples: “A certain man was rich and he had a steward, and this one was accused to him as handling his goods wastefully.
2  So he called him and said to him, ‘What is this I hear about you? Hand in the account of your stewardship, for you can no longer manage the house.’
3  Then the steward said to himself, ‘What am I to do, seeing that my master will take the stewardship away from me? I am not strong enough to dig, I am ashamed to beg.
4  Ah! I know what I shall do, so that, when I am put out of the stewardship, people will receive me into their homes.’
5  And calling to him each one of the debtors of his master he proceeded to say to the first, ‘How much are you owing my master?’
6  He said, ‘A hundred bath measures of olive oil.’ He said to him, ‘Take your written agreement back and sit down and quickly write fifty.’
7  Next, he said to another one, ‘Now you, how much are you owing?’ He said, ‘A hundred cor measures of wheat.’ He said to him, ‘Take your written agreement back and write eighty.’
8  And his master commended the steward, though unrighteous, because he acted with practical wisdom;  for the sons of this system of things are wiser in a practical way toward their own generation than the sons of the light are.
9  “Also, I say to YOU, Make friends for yourselves by means of the unrighteous riches, so that, when such fail, they may receive YOU into the everlasting dwelling places.
10  The person faithful in what is least is faithful also in much, and the person unrighteous in what is least is unrighteous also in much.
11  Therefore, if YOU have not proved yourselves faithful in connection with the unrighteous riches, who will entrust YOU with what is true?
12  And if YOU have not proved yourselves faithful in connection with what is another’s, who will give YOU what is for yourselves?
13  No house servant can be a slave to two masters;  for, either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will stick to the one and despise the other. YOU cannot be slaves to God and to riches.”
14  Now the Pharisees, who were money lovers, were listening to all these things, and they began to sneer at him.
15  Consequently he said to them: “YOU are those who declare yourselves righteous before men, but God knows YOUR hearts;  because what is lofty among men is a disgusting thing in God’s sight.
16  “The Law and the Prophets were until John. From then on the kingdom of God is being declared as good news, and every sort of person is pressing forward toward it.
17  Indeed, it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for one particle of a letter of the Law to go unfulfilled.
18  “Everyone that divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery, and he that marries a woman divorced from a husband commits adultery.
19  “But a certain man was rich, and he used to deck himself with purple and linen, enjoying himself from day to day with magnificence.
20  But a certain beggar named Lazarus used to be put at his gate, full of ulcers
21  and desiring to be filled with the things dropping from the table of the rich man. Yes, too, the dogs would come and lick his ulcers.
22  Now in course of time the beggar died and he was carried off by the angels to the bosom [position] of Abraham. “Also, the rich man died and was buried.
23  And in Hades he lifted up his eyes, he existing in torments, and he saw Abraham afar off and Lazarus in the bosom [position] with him.
24  So he called and said, ‘Father Abraham, have mercy on me and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, because I am in anguish in this blazing fire.’
25  But Abraham said, ‘Child, remember that you received in full your good things in your lifetime, but Lazarus correspondingly the injurious things. Now, however, he is having comfort here but you are in anguish.
26  And besides all these things, a great chasm has been fixed between us and YOU people, so that those wanting to go over from here to YOU people cannot, neither may people cross over from there to us.’
27  Then he said, ‘In that event I ask you, father, to send him to the house of my father,
28  for I have five brothers, in order that he may give them a thorough witness, that they also should not get into this place of torment.’
29  But Abraham said, ‘They have Moses and the Prophets;  let them listen to these.’
30  Then he said, ‘No, indeed, father Abraham, but if someone from the dead goes to them they will repent.’
31  But he said to him, ‘If they do not listen to Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded if someone rises from the dead.’”
luke 17
17  Then he said to his disciples: “It is unavoidable that causes for stumbling should come. Nevertheless, woe to the one through whom they come!
2  It would be of more advantage to him if a millstone were suspended from his neck and he were thrown into the sea than for him to stumble one of these little ones.
3  Pay attention to yourselves. If your brother commits a sin give him a rebuke, and if he repents forgive him.
4  Even if he sins seven times a day against you and he comes back to you seven times, saying, ‘I repent,’ you must forgive him.”
5  Now the apostles said to the Lord: “Give us more faith.”
6  Then the Lord said: “If YOU had faith the size of a mustard grain, YOU would say to this black mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and planted in the sea!’ and it would obey YOU.
7  “Who of YOU is there that has a slave plowing or minding the flock who will say to him when he gets in from the field, ‘Come here at once and recline at the table’?
8  Rather, will he not say to him, ‘Get something ready for me to have my evening meal, and put on an apron and minister to me until I am through eating and drinking, and afterward you can eat and drink’?
9  He will not feel gratitude to the slave because he did the things assigned, will he?
10  So YOU, also, when YOU have done all the things assigned to YOU, say, ‘We are good-for-nothing slaves. What we have done is what we ought to have done.’”
11  And while he was going to Jerusalem he was passing through the midst of Samaria and Galilee.
12  And as he was entering into a certain village ten leprous men met him, but they stood up afar off.
13  And they raised their voices and said: “Jesus, Instructor, have mercy on us!”
14  And when he got sight of them he said to them: “Go and show yourselves to the priests.” Then as they were going off their cleansing occurred.
15  One of them, when he saw he was healed, turned back, glorifying God with a loud voice.
16  And he fell upon his face at [Jesus’] feet, thanking him;  furthermore, he was a Samaritan.
17  In reply Jesus said: “The ten were cleansed, were they not? Where, then, are the other nine?
18  Were none found that turned back to give glory to God but this man of another nation?”
19  And he said to him: “Rise and be on your way;  your faith has made you well.”
20  But on being asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God was coming, he answered them and said: “The kingdom of God is not coming with striking observableness,
21  neither will people be saying, ‘See here!’ or, ‘There!’ For, look! the kingdom of God is in YOUR midst.”
22  Then he said to the disciples: “Days will come when YOU will desire to see one of the days of the Son of man but YOU will not see [it].
23  And people will say to YOU, ‘See there!’ or, ‘See here!’ Do not go out or chase after [them].
24  For even as the lightning, by its flashing, shines from one part under heaven to another part under heaven, so the Son of man will be.
25  First, however, he must undergo many sufferings and be rejected by this generation.
26  Moreover, just as it occurred in the days of Noah, so it will be also in the days of the Son of man:
27  they were eating, they were drinking, men were marrying, women were being given in marriage, until that day when Noah entered into the ark, and the flood arrived and destroyed them all.
28  Likewise, just as it occurred in the days of Lot: they were eating, they were drinking, they were buying, they were selling, they were planting, they were building.
29  But on the day that Lot came out of Sodom it rained fire and sulphur from heaven and destroyed them all.
30  The same way it will be on that day when the Son of man is to be revealed.
31  “On that day let the person that is on the housetop but whose movable things are in the house not come down to pick these up, and the person out in the field, let him likewise not return to the things behind.
32  REMEMBER the wife of Lot.
33  Whoever seeks to keep his soul safe for himself will lose it, but whoever loses it will preserve it alive.
34  I tell YOU, In that night two [men] will be in one bed;  the one will be taken along, but the other will be abandoned.
35  There will be two [women] grinding at the same mill;  the one will be taken along, but the other will be abandoned.”
36  ——
37  So in response they said to him: “Where, Lord?” He said to them: “Where the body is, there also the eagles will be gathered together.”
luke 18
18  Then he went on to tell them an illustration with regard to the need for them always to pray and not to give up,
2  saying: “In a certain city there was a certain judge that had no fear of God and had no respect for man.
3  But there was a widow in that city and she kept going to him, saying, ‘See that I get justice from my adversary at law.’
4  Well, for a while he was unwilling, but afterward he said to himself, ‘Although I do not fear God or respect a man,
5  at any rate, because of this widow’s continually making me trouble, I will see that she gets justice, so that she will not keep coming and pummeling me to a finish.’”
6  Then the Lord said: “HEAR what the judge, although unrighteous, said!
7  Certainly, then, shall not God cause justice to be done for his chosen ones who cry out to him day and night, even though he is long-suffering toward them?
8  I tell YOU, He will cause justice to be done to them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man arrives, will he really find the faith on the earth?”
9  But he spoke this illustration also to some who trusted in themselves that they were righteous and who considered the rest as nothing:
10  “Two men went up into the temple to pray, the one a Pharisee and the other a tax collector.
11  The Pharisee stood and began to pray these things to himself, ‘O God, I thank you I am not as the rest of men, extortioners, unrighteous, adulterers, or even as this tax collector.
12  I fast twice a week, I give the tenth of all things I acquire.’
13  But the tax collector standing at a distance was not willing even to raise his eyes heavenward, but kept beating his breast, saying, ‘O God, be gracious to me a sinner.’
14  I tell YOU, This man went down to his home proved more righteous than that man;  because everyone that exalts himself will be humiliated, but he that humbles himself will be exalted.”
15  Now people began to bring him also their infants for him to touch these;  but on seeing it the disciples began to reprimand them.
16  However, Jesus called the [infants] to him, saying: “Let the young children come to me, and do not try to stop them. For the kingdom of God belongs to suchlike ones.
17  Truly I say to YOU, Whoever does not receive the kingdom of God like a young child will by no means get into it.”
18  And a certain ruler questioned him, saying: “Good Teacher, by doing what shall I inherit everlasting life?”
19  Jesus said to him: “Why do you call me good? Nobody is good, except one, God.
20  You know the commandments, ‘Do not commit adultery, Do not murder, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Honor your father and mother.’”
21  Then he said: “All these I have kept from youth on.”
22  After hearing that, Jesus said to him: “There is yet one thing lacking about you: Sell all the things you have and distribute to poor people, and you will have treasure in the heavens;  and come be my follower.”
23  When he heard this, he became deeply grieved, for he was very rich.
24  Jesus looked at him and said: “How difficult a thing it will be for those having money to make their way into the kingdom of God!
25  It is easier, in fact, for a camel to get through the eye of a sewing needle than for a rich man to get into the kingdom of God.”
26  Those who heard this said: “Who possibly can be saved?”
27  He said: “The things impossible with men are possible with God.”
28  But Peter said: “Look! We have left our own things and followed you.”
29  He said to them: “Truly I say to YOU, There is no one who has left house or wife or brothers or parents or children for the sake of the kingdom of God
30  who will not in any way get many times more in this period of time, and in the coming system of things everlasting life.”
31  Then he took the twelve aside and said to them: “Look! We are going up to Jerusalem, and all the things written by means of the prophets as to the Son of man will be completed.
32  For instance, he will be delivered up to [men of] the nations and will be made fun of and be treated insolently and spit upon; 
33  and after scourging him they will kill him, but on the third day he will rise.”
34  However, they did not get the meaning of any of these things;  but this utterance was hidden from them, and they were not knowing the things said.
35  Now as he was getting near to Jericho a certain blind man was sitting beside the road begging.
36  Because he heard a crowd moving through he began to inquire what this might mean.
37  They reported to him: “Jesus the Nazarene is passing by!”
38  At that he cried out, saying: “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!”
39  And those going in advance began to tell him sternly to keep quiet, but that much more he kept shouting: “Son of David, have mercy on me.”
40  Then Jesus stood still and commanded the [man] to be led to him. After he got near, [Jesus] asked him:
41  “What do you want me to do for you?” He said: “Lord, let me recover sight.”
42  So Jesus said to him: “Recover your sight;  your faith has made you well.”
43  And instantly he recovered sight, and he began to follow him, glorifying God. Also, all the people, at seeing [it], gave praise to God.
luke 19
19  And he entered Jericho and was going through.
2  Now here there was a man called by the name Zacchaeus;  and he was a chief tax collector, and he was rich.
3  Well, he was seeking to see who this Jesus was, but he could not for the crowd, because he was small in size.
4  So he ran ahead to an advance position and climbed a fig-mulberry tree in order to see him, because he was about to go through that way.
5  Now when Jesus got to the place, he looked up and said to him: “Zacchaeus, hurry and get down, for today I must stay in your house.”
6  With that he hurried and got down and with rejoicing he received him as guest.
7  But when they saw [it], they all fell to muttering, saying: “With a man that is a sinner he went in to lodge.”
8  But Zacchaeus stood up and said to the Lord: “Look! The half of my belongings, Lord, I am giving to the poor, and whatever I extorted from anyone by false accusation I am restoring fourfold.”
9  At this Jesus said to him: “This day salvation has come to this house, because he also is a son of Abraham.
10  For the Son of man came to seek and to save what was lost.”
11  While they were listening to these things he spoke in addition an illustration, because he was near Jerusalem and they were imagining that the kingdom of God was going to display itself instantly.
12  Therefore he said: “A certain man of noble birth traveled to a distant land to secure kingly power for himself and to return.
13  Calling ten slaves of his he gave them ten minas and told them, ‘Do business till I come.’
14  But his citizens hated him and sent out a body of ambassadors after him, to say, ‘We do not want this [man] to become king over us.’
15  “Eventually when he got back after having secured the kingly power, he commanded to be called to him these slaves to whom he had given the silver money, in order to ascertain what they had gained by business activity.
16  Then the first one presented himself, saying, ‘Lord, your mina gained ten minas.’
17  So he said to him, ‘Well done, good slave! Because in a very small matter you have proved yourself faithful, hold authority over ten cities.’
18  Now the second came, saying, ‘Your mina, Lord, made five minas.’
19  He said to this one also, ‘You, too, be in charge of five cities.’
20  But a different one came, saying, ‘Lord, here is your mina, that I kept laid away in a cloth.
21  You see, I was in fear of you, because you are a harsh man;  you take up what you did not deposit and you reap what you did not sow.’
22  He said to him, ‘Out of your own mouth I judge you, wicked slave. You knew, did you, that I am a harsh man, taking up what I did not deposit and reaping what I did not sow?
23  Hence why is it you did not put my silver money in a bank? Then on my arrival I would have collected it with interest.’
24  “With that he said to those standing by, ‘Take the mina from him and give it to him that has the ten minas.’
25  But they said to him, ‘Lord, he has ten minas!’—
26  ‘I say to YOU, To everyone that has, more will be given;  but from the one that does not have, even what he has will be taken away.
27  Moreover, these enemies of mine that did not want me to become king over them BRING here and slaughter them before me.’”
28  So, after he had said these things, he began to go on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
29  And when he got near to Bethphage and Bethany at the mountain called Mount of Olives, he sent forth two of the disciples,
30  saying: “Go into the village that is within sight of YOU, and in it after YOU pass in YOU will find a colt tied, on which none of mankind ever sat. Loose it and bring it.
31  But if anyone asks YOU, ‘Why is it YOU are loosing it?’ YOU must speak in this way, ‘The Lord needs it.’”
32  So those who were sent forth departed and found it just as he said to them.
33  But as they were loosing the colt the owners of it said to them: “Why are YOU loosing the colt?”
34  They said: “The Lord needs it.”
35  And they led it to Jesus, and they threw their outer garments upon the colt and set Jesus upon [it].
36  As he moved along they kept spreading their outer garments on the road.
37  As soon as he got near the road down the Mount of Olives all the multitude of the disciples started to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice concerning all the powerful works they had seen,
38  saying: “Blessed is the One coming as the King in Jehovah’s name! Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest places!”
39  However, some of the Pharisees from the crowd said to him: “Teacher, rebuke your disciples.”
40  But in reply he said: “I tell YOU, If these remained silent, the stones would cry out.”
41  And when he got nearby, he viewed the city and wept over it,
42  saying: “If you, even you, had discerned in this day the things having to do with peace—but now they have been hid from your eyes.
43  Because the days will come upon you when your enemies will build around you a fortification with pointed stakes and will encircle you and distress you from every side,
44  and they will dash you and your children within you to the ground, and they will not leave a stone upon a stone in you, because you did not discern the time of your being inspected.”
45  And he entered into the temple and started to throw out those who were selling,
46  saying to them: “It is written, ‘And my house will be a house of prayer,’ but YOU made it a cave of robbers.”
47  Furthermore, he went teaching daily in the temple. But the chief priests and the scribes and the principal ones of the people were seeking to destroy him; 
48  and yet they did not find the effective thing for them to do, for the people one and all kept hanging onto him to hear him.
luke 20
20  On one of the days while he was teaching the people in the temple and declaring the good news, the chief priests and the scribes with the older men came near,
2  and they spoke up, saying to him: “Tell us by what authority you do these things, or who it is that gave you this authority.”
3  In reply he said to them: “I will also ask YOU a question, and YOU tell me:
4  Was the baptism of John from heaven or from men?”
5  Then among themselves they drew conclusions, saying: “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Why is it YOU did not believe him?’
6  But if we say, ‘From men,’ the people one and all will stone us, for they are persuaded that John was a prophet.”
7  So they replied that they did not know its source.
8  And Jesus said to them: “Neither am I telling YOU by what authority I do these things.”
9  Then he started to tell the people this illustration: “A man planted a vineyard and let it out to cultivators, and he traveled abroad for considerable time.
10  But in due season he sent out a slave to the cultivators, that they might give him some of the fruit of the vineyard. The cultivators, however, sent him away empty, after beating him up.
11  But he repeated and sent them a different slave. That one also they beat up and dishonored and sent away empty.
12  Yet again he sent a third;  this one also they wounded and threw out.
13  At this the owner of the vineyard said, ‘What shall I do? I will send my son the beloved. Likely they will respect this one.’
14  When the cultivators caught sight of him they went reasoning with one another, saying, ‘This is the heir;  let us kill him, that the inheritance may become ours.’
15  With that they threw him outside the vineyard and killed him. What, therefore, will the owner of the vineyard do to them?
16  He will come and destroy these cultivators and will give the vineyard to others.” On hearing [this] they said: “Never may that happen!”
17  But he looked upon them and said: “What, then, does this that is written mean, ‘The stone which the builders rejected, this has become the chief cornerstone’?
18  Everyone falling upon that stone will be shattered. As for anyone upon whom it falls, it will pulverize him.”
19  The scribes and the chief priests now sought to get their hands on him in that very hour, but they feared the people;  for they perceived that he spoke this illustration with them in mind.
20  And, after observing him closely, they sent out men secretly hired to pretend that they were righteous, in order that they might catch him in speech, so as to turn him over to the government and to the authority of the governor.
21  And they questioned him, saying: “Teacher, we know you speak and teach correctly and show no partiality, but you teach the way of God in line with truth:
22  Is it lawful for us to pay tax to Caesar or not?”
23  But he detected their cunning and said to them:
24  “Show me a denarius. Whose image and inscription does it have?” They said: “Caesar’s.”
25  He said to them: “By all means, then, pay back Caesar’s things to Caesar, but God’s things to God.”
26  Well, they were not able to catch him in this saying before the people, but, in amazement at his answer, they said nothing.
27  However, some of the Sadducees, those who say there is no resurrection, came up and questioned him,
28  saying: “Teacher, Moses wrote us, ‘If a man’s brother dies having a wife, but this one remained childless, his brother should take the wife and raise up offspring from her for his brother.’
29  Accordingly there were seven brothers;  and the first took a wife and died childless.
30  So the second,
31  and the third took her. Likewise even the seven: they did not leave children behind, but died off.
32  Lastly, the woman also died.
33  Consequently, in the resurrection, of which one of them does she become [the] wife? For the seven got her as wife.”
34  Jesus said to them: “The children of this system of things marry and are given in marriage,
35  but those who have been counted worthy of gaining that system of things and the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor are given in marriage.
36  In fact, neither can they die anymore, for they are like the angels, and they are God’s children by being children of the resurrection.
37  But that the dead are raised up even Moses disclosed, in the account about the thornbush, when he calls Jehovah ‘the God of Abraham and God of Isaac and God of Jacob.’
38  He is a God, not of the dead, but of the living, for they are all living to him.”
39  In response some of the scribes said: “Teacher, you spoke well.”
40  For no longer did they have the courage to ask him a single question.
41  In turn he said to them: “How is it they say that the Christ is David’s son?
42  For David himself says in the book of Psalms, ‘Jehovah said to my Lord, Sit at my right hand
43  until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.’
44  David, therefore, calls him ‘Lord’;  so how is he his son?”
45  Then, while all the people were listening he said to the disciples:
46  “Look out for the scribes who desire to walk around in robes and like greetings in the marketplaces and front seats in the synagogues and most prominent places at evening meals,
47  and who devour the houses of the widows and for a pretext make long prayers. These will receive a heavier judgment.”
luke 21
21  Now as he looked up he saw the rich dropping their gifts into the treasury chests.
2  Then he saw a certain needy widow drop two small coins of very little value there,
3  and he said: “I tell YOU truthfully, This widow, although poor, dropped in more than they all did.
4  For all these dropped in gifts out of their surplus, but this [woman] out of her want dropped in all the means of living she had.”
5  Later, as certain ones were speaking concerning the temple, how it was adorned with fine stones and dedicated things,
6  he said: “As for these things that YOU are beholding, the days will come in which not a stone upon a stone will be left here and not be thrown down.”
7  Then they questioned him, saying: “Teacher, when will these things actually be, and what will be the sign when these things are destined to occur?”
8  He said: “Look out that YOU are not misled;  for many will come on the basis of my name, saying, ‘I am he,’ and, ‘The due time has approached.’ Do not go after them.
9  Furthermore, when YOU hear of wars and disorders, do not be terrified. For these things must occur first, but the end does not [occur] immediately.”
10  Then he went on to say to them: “Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; 
11  and there will be great earthquakes, and in one place after another pestilences and food shortages;  and there will be fearful sights and from heaven great signs.
12  “But before all these things people will lay their hands upon YOU and persecute YOU, delivering YOU up to the synagogues and prisons, YOU being haled before kings and governors for the sake of my name.
13  It will turn out to YOU for a witness.
14  Therefore settle it in YOUR hearts not to rehearse beforehand how to make YOUR defense,
15  for I will give YOU a mouth and wisdom, which all YOUR opposers together will not be able to resist or dispute.
16  Moreover, YOU will be delivered up even by parents and brothers and relatives and friends, and they will put some of YOU to death; 
17  and YOU will be objects of hatred by all people because of my name.
18  And yet not a hair of YOUR heads will by any means perish.
19  By endurance on YOUR part YOU will acquire YOUR souls.
20  “Furthermore, when YOU see Jerusalem surrounded by encamped armies, then know that the desolating of her has drawn near.
21  Then let those in Judea begin fleeing to the mountains, and let those in the midst of her withdraw, and let those in the country places not enter into her; 
22  because these are days for meting out justice, that all the things written may be fulfilled.
23  Woe to the pregnant women and the ones suckling a baby in those days! For there will be great necessity upon the land and wrath on this people; 
24  and they will fall by the edge of the sword and be led captive into all the nations;  and Jerusalem will be trampled on by the nations, until the appointed times of the nations are fulfilled.
25  “Also, there will be signs in sun and moon and stars, and on the earth anguish of nations, not knowing the way out because of the roaring of the sea and [its] agitation,
26  while men become faint out of fear and expectation of the things coming upon the inhabited earth;  for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
27  And then they will see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
28  But as these things start to occur, raise yourselves erect and lift YOUR heads up, because YOUR deliverance is getting near.”
29  With that he spoke an illustration to them: “Note the fig tree and all the other trees:
30  When they are already in the bud, by observing it YOU know for yourselves that now the summer is near.
31  In this way YOU also, when YOU see these things occurring, know that the kingdom of God is near.
32  Truly I say to YOU, This generation will by no means pass away until all things occur.
33  Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will by no means pass away.
34  “But pay attention to yourselves that YOUR hearts never become weighed down with overeating and heavy drinking and anxieties of life, and suddenly that day be instantly upon YOU
35  as a snare. For it will come in upon all those dwelling upon the face of all the earth.
36  Keep awake, then, all the time making supplication that YOU may succeed in escaping all these things that are destined to occur, and in standing before the Son of man.”
37  So by day he would be teaching in the temple, but by night he would go out and lodge on the mountain called the Mount of Olives.
38  And all the people would come early in the day to him in the temple to hear him.
luke 22
22  Now the festival of the unfermented cakes, the so-called Passover, was getting near.
2  Also, the chief priests and the scribes were seeking the effective way for them to get rid of him, for they were in fear of the people.
3  But Satan entered into Judas, the one called Iscariot, who was numbered among the twelve; 
4  and he went off and talked with the chief priests and [temple] captains about the effective way to betray him to them.
5  Well, they rejoiced and agreed to give him silver money.
6  So he consented, and he began to seek a good opportunity to betray him to them without a crowd around.
7  The day of the unfermented cakes now arrived, on which the passover [victim] must be sacrificed; 
8  and he dispatched Peter and John, saying: “Go and get the passover ready for us to eat.”
9  They said to him: “Where do you want us to get [it] ready?”
10  He said to them: “Look! When YOU enter into the city a man carrying an earthenware vessel of water will meet YOU. Follow him into the house into which he enters.
11  And YOU must say to the landlord of the house, ‘The Teacher says to you: “Where is the guest room in which I may eat the passover with my disciples?”’
12  And that [man] will show YOU a large upper room furnished. Get [it] ready there.”
13  So they departed and found it just as he had said to them, and they got the passover ready.
14  At length when the hour came, he reclined at the table, and the apostles with him.
15  And he said to them: “I have greatly desired to eat this passover with YOU before I suffer; 
16  for I tell YOU, I will not eat it again until it becomes fulfilled in the kingdom of God.”
17  And, accepting a cup, he gave thanks and said: “Take this and pass it from one to the other among yourselves; 
18  for I tell YOU, From now on I will not drink again from the product of the vine until the kingdom of God arrives.”
19  Also, he took a loaf, gave thanks, broke it, and gave it to them, saying: “This means my body which is to be given in YOUR behalf. Keep doing this in remembrance of me.”
20  Also, the cup in the same way after they had the evening meal, he saying: “This cup means the new covenant by virtue of my blood, which is to be poured out in YOUR behalf.
21  “But, look! the hand of my betrayer is with me at the table.
22  Because the Son of man is going his way according to what is marked out;  all the same, woe to that man through whom he is betrayed!”
23  So they started to discuss among themselves the question of which of them would really be the one that was about to do this.
24  However, there also arose a heated dispute among them over which one of them seemed to be greatest.
25  But he said to them: “The kings of the nations lord it over them, and those having authority over them are called Benefactors.
26  YOU, though, are not to be that way. But let him that is the greatest among YOU become as the youngest, and the one acting as chief as the one ministering.
27  For which one is greater, the one reclining at the table or the one ministering? Is it not the one reclining at the table? But I am in YOUR midst as the one ministering.
28  “However, YOU are the ones that have stuck with me in my trials; 
29  and I make a covenant with YOU, just as my Father has made a covenant with me, for a kingdom,
30  that YOU may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones to judge the twelve tribes of Israel.
31  “Simon, Simon, look! Satan has demanded to have YOU men to sift YOU as wheat.
32  But I have made supplication for you that your faith may not give out;  and you, when once you have returned, strengthen your brothers.”
33  Then he said to him: “Lord, I am ready to go with you both into prison and into death.”
34  But he said: “I tell you, Peter, A cock will not crow today until you have three times denied knowing me.”
35  He also said to them: “When I sent YOU forth without purse and food pouch and sandals, YOU did not want for anything, did YOU?” They said: “No!”
36  Then he said to them: “But now let the one that has a purse take it up, likewise also a food pouch;  and let the one having no sword sell his outer garment and buy one.
37  For I tell YOU that this which is written must be accomplished in me, namely, ‘And he was reckoned with lawless ones.’ For that which concerns me is having an accomplishment.”
38  Then they said: “Lord, look! here are two swords.” He said to them: “It is enough.”
39  On going out he went as customarily to the Mount of Olives;  and the disciples also followed him.
40  Having come to the place he said to them: “Carry on prayer, that YOU do not enter into temptation.”
41  And he himself drew away from them about a stone’s throw, and bent his knees and began to pray,
42  saying: “Father, if you wish, remove this cup from me. Nevertheless, let, not my will, but yours take place.”
43  Then an angel from heaven appeared to him and strengthened him.
44  But getting into an agony he continued praying more earnestly;  and his sweat became as drops of blood falling to the ground.
45  And he rose from prayer, went to the disciples and found them slumbering from grief; 
46  and he said to them: “Why are YOU sleeping? Rise and carry on prayer, that YOU do not enter into temptation.”
47  While he was yet speaking, look! a crowd, and the [man] called Judas, one of the twelve, was going before them;  and he approached Jesus to kiss him.
48  But Jesus said to him: “Judas, do you betray the Son of man with a kiss?”
49  When those about him saw what was going to happen, they said: “Lord, shall we strike with the sword?”
50  A certain one of them even did strike the slave of the high priest and took off his right ear.
51  But in reply Jesus said: “LET it go as far as this.” And he touched the ear and healed him.
52  Jesus then said to the chief priests and captains of the temple and older men that had come there for him: “Did YOU come out with swords and clubs as against a robber?
53  While I was with YOU in the temple day after day YOU did not stretch out YOUR hands against me. But this is YOUR hour and the authority of darkness.”
54  Then they arrested him and led him off and brought him into the house of the high priest;  but Peter was following at a distance.
55  When they lit a fire in the midst of the courtyard and sat down together, Peter was sitting in among them.
56  But a certain servant girl saw him sitting by the bright fire and looked him over and said: “This man also was with him.”
57  But he denied it, saying: “I do not know him, woman.”
58  And after a short time another person seeing him said: “You also are one of them.” But Peter said: “Man, I am not.”
59  And after about an hour intervened a certain other [man] began insisting strongly: “For a certainty this [man] also was with him;  for, in fact, he is a Galilean!”
60  But Peter said: “Man, I do not know what you are saying.” And instantly, while he was yet speaking, a cock crowed.
61  And the Lord turned and looked upon Peter, and Peter recalled the utterance of the Lord when he said to him: “Before a cock crows today you will disown me three times.”
62  And he went outside and wept bitterly.
63  Now the men that had him in custody began to make fun of him, hitting him; 
64  and after covering him over they would ask and say: “Prophesy. Who is it that struck you?”
65  And they went on saying many other things in blasphemy against him.
66  At length when it became day, the assembly of older men of the people, both chief priests and scribes, gathered together, and they haled him into their Sanhedrin hall, saying:
67  “If you are the Christ, tell us.” But he said to them: “Even if I told YOU, YOU would not believe it at all.
68  Moreover, if I questioned YOU, YOU would not answer at all.
69  However, from now on the Son of man will be sitting at the powerful right hand of God.”
70  At this they all said: “Are you, therefore, the Son of God?” He said to them: “YOU yourselves are saying that I am.”
71  They said: “Why do we need further witness? For we ourselves have heard [it] out of his own mouth.”
luke 23
23  So the multitude of them rose, one and all, and led him to Pilate.
2  Then they started to accuse him, saying: “This man we found subverting our nation and forbidding the paying of taxes to Caesar and saying he himself is Christ a king.”
3  Now Pilate asked him the question: “Are you the king of the Jews?” In answer to him he said: “You yourself are saying [it].”
4  Then Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowds: “I find no crime in this man.”
5  But they began to be insistent, saying: “He stirs up the people by teaching throughout all Judea, even starting out from Galilee to here.”
6  On hearing that, Pilate asked whether the man was a Galilean,
7  and, after ascertaining that he was from the jurisdiction of Herod, he sent him on to Herod, who was also himself in Jerusalem in these days.
8  When Herod saw Jesus he rejoiced greatly, for over a considerable time he was wanting to see him because of having heard about him, and he was hoping to see some sign performed by him.
9  Now he began to question him with a good many words;  but he made him no answer.
10  However, the chief priests and the scribes kept standing up and vehemently accusing him.
11  Then Herod together with his soldier guards discredited him, and he made fun of him by clothing him with a bright garment and sent him back to Pilate.
12  Both Herod and Pilate now became friends with each other on that very day;  for before that they had continued at enmity between themselves.
13  Pilate then called the chief priests and the rulers and the people together
14  and said to them: “YOU brought this man to me as one inciting the people to revolt, and, look! I examined him in front of YOU but found in this man no ground for the charges YOU are bringing against him.
15  In fact, neither did Herod, for he sent him back to us;  and, look! nothing deserving of death has been committed by him.
16  I will therefore chastise him and release him.”
17  ——
18  But with their whole multitude they cried out, saying: “Take this one away, but release Barabbas to us!”
19  (Which [man] had been thrown into prison for a certain sedition occurring in the city and for murder.)
20  Again Pilate called out to them, because he wanted to release Jesus.
21  Then they began to yell, saying: “Impale! Impale him!”
22  The third time he said to them: “Why, what bad thing did this [man] do? I found nothing deserving of death in him;  I will therefore chastise and release him.”
23  At this they began to be urgent, with loud voices, demanding that he be impaled;  and their voices began to win out.
24  So Pilate gave sentence for their demand to be met:
25  he released the man that had been thrown into prison for sedition and murder and whom they were demanding, but he surrendered Jesus to their will.
26  Now as they led him away, they laid hold of Simon, a certain native of Cyrene, coming from the country, and they placed the torture stake upon him to bear it behind Jesus.
27  But there was following him a great multitude of the people and of women who kept beating themselves in grief and bewailing him.
28  Jesus turned to the women and said: “Daughters of Jerusalem, stop weeping for me. On the contrary, weep for yourselves and for YOUR children; 
29  because, look! days are coming in which people will say, ‘Happy are the barren women, and the wombs that did not give birth and the breasts that did not nurse!’
30  Then they will start to say to the mountains, ‘Fall over us!’ and to the hills, ‘Cover us over!’
31  Because if they do these things when the tree is moist, what will occur when it is withered?”
32  But two other men, evildoers, were also being led to be executed with him.
33  And when they got to the place called Skull, there they impaled him and the evildoers, one on his right and one on his left.
34  [[But Jesus was saying: “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing.”]] Furthermore, to distribute his garments, they cast lots.
35  And the people stood looking on. But the rulers were sneering, saying: “Others he saved;  let him save himself, if this one is the Christ of God, the Chosen One.”
36  Even the soldiers made fun of him, coming close and offering him sour wine
37  and saying: “If you are the king of the Jews, save yourself.”
38  There was also an inscription over him: “This is the king of the Jews.”
39  But one of the hung evildoers began to say abusively to him: “You are the Christ, are you not? Save yourself and us.”
40  In reply the other rebuked him and said: “Do you not fear God at all, now that you are in the same judgment?
41  And we, indeed, justly so, for we are receiving in full what we deserve for things we did;  but this [man] did nothing out of the way.”
42  And he went on to say: “Jesus, remember me when you get into your kingdom.”
43  And he said to him: “Truly I tell you today, You will be with me in Paradise.”
44  Well, by now it was about the sixth hour, and yet a darkness fell over all the earth until the ninth hour,
45  because the sunlight failed;  then the curtain of the sanctuary was rent down the middle.
46  And Jesus called with a loud voice and said: “Father, into your hands I entrust my spirit.” When he had said this, he expired.
47  Because of seeing what occurred the army officer began to glorify God, saying: “Really this man was righteous.”
48  And all the crowds that were gathered together there for this spectacle, when they beheld the things that occurred, began to return, beating their breasts.
49  Moreover, all those acquainted with him were standing at a distance. Also, women, who together had followed him from Galilee, were standing beholding these things.
50  And, look! a man named Joseph, who was a member of the Council, a good and righteous man—
51  this [man] had not voted in support of their design and action—he was from Arimathea, a city of the Judeans, and was waiting for the kingdom of God; 
52  this man went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.
53  And he took it down and wrapped it up in fine linen, and he laid him in a tomb carved in the rock, in which no man had yet lain.
54  Now it was the day of Preparation, and the evening light of the sabbath was approaching.
55  But the women, who had come with him out of Galilee, followed along and took a look at the memorial tomb and how his body was laid; 
56  and they went back to prepare spices and perfumed oils. But, of course, they rested on the sabbath according to the commandment.
luke 24
24  On the first day of the week, however, they went very early to the tomb, bearing the spices they had prepared.
2  But they found the stone rolled away from the memorial tomb,
3  and when they entered they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
4  While they were in perplexity over this, look! two men in flashing clothing stood by them.
5  As the [women] became frightened and kept their faces turned to the ground, the [men] said to them: “Why are YOU looking for the living One among the dead?
6  [[He is not here, but has been raised up.]] Recall how he spoke to YOU while he was yet in Galilee,
7  saying that the Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men and be impaled and yet on the third day rise.”
8  So they called his sayings to mind,
9  and they returned from the memorial tomb and reported all these things to the eleven and to all the rest.
10  They were the Magdalene Mary, and Joanna, and Mary the [mother] of James. Also, the rest of the women with them were telling the apostles these things.
11  However, these sayings appeared as nonsense to them and they would not believe the [women].
12  [[But Peter rose and ran to the memorial tomb, and, stooping forward, he beheld the bandages alone. So he went off, wondering within himself at what had occurred.]]
13  But, look! on that very day two of them were journeying to a village about seven miles distant from Jerusalem [and] named Emmaus,
14  and they were conversing with each other over all these things that had come about.
15  Now as they were conversing and discussing, Jesus himself approached and began walking with them; 
16  but their eyes were kept from recognizing him.
17  He said to them: “What are these matters that YOU are debating between yourselves as YOU walk along?” And they stood still with sad faces.
18  In answer the one named Cleopas said to him: “Are you dwelling as an alien by yourself in Jerusalem and so do not know the things that have occurred in her in these days?”
19  And he said to them: “What things?” They said to him: “The things concerning Jesus the Nazarene, who became a prophet powerful in work and word before God and all the people; 
20  and how our chief priests and rulers handed him over to the sentence of death and impaled him.
21  But we were hoping that this [man] was the one destined to deliver Israel;  yes, and besides all these things, this makes the third day since these things occurred.
22  Moreover, certain women from among us also astonished us, because they had been early to the memorial tomb
23  but did not find his body and they came saying they had also seen a supernatural sight of angels, who said he is alive.
24  Further, some of those with us went off to the memorial tomb;  and they found it so, just as the women had said, but they did not see him.”
25  So he said to them: “O senseless ones and slow in heart to believe on all the things the prophets spoke!
26  Was it not necessary for the Christ to suffer these things and to enter into his glory?”
27  And commencing at Moses and all the Prophets he interpreted to them things pertaining to himself in all the Scriptures.
28  Finally they got close to the village where they were journeying, and he made as if he was journeying on farther.
29  But they used pressure upon him, saying: “Stay with us, because it is toward evening and the day has already declined.” With that he went in to stay with them.
30  And as he was reclining with them at the meal he took the loaf, blessed it, broke it and began to hand it to them.
31  At that their eyes were fully opened and they recognized him;  and he disappeared from them.
32  And they said to each other: “Were not our hearts burning as he was speaking to us on the road, as he was fully opening up the Scriptures to us?”
33  And in that very hour they rose and returned to Jerusalem, and they found the eleven and those with them assembled together,
34  saying: “For a fact the Lord was raised up and he appeared to Simon!”
35  Now they themselves related the [events] on the road and how he became known to them by the breaking of the loaf.
36  While they were speaking of these things he himself stood in their midst [[and said to them: “May YOU have peace.”]]
37  But because they were terrified, and had become frightened, they were imagining they beheld a spirit.
38  So he said to them: “Why are YOU troubled, and why is it doubts come up in YOUR hearts?
39  See my hands and my feet, that it is I myself;  feel me and see, because a spirit does not have flesh and bones just as YOU behold that I have.”
40  [[And as he said this he showed them his hands and his feet.]]
41  But while they were still not believing for sheer joy and were wondering, he said to them: “Do YOU have something there to eat?”
42  And they handed him a piece of broiled fish; 
43  and he took it and ate it before their eyes.
44  He now said to them: “These are my words which I spoke to YOU while I was yet with YOU, that all the things written in the law of Moses and in the Prophets and Psalms about me must be fulfilled.”
45  Then he opened up their minds fully to grasp the meaning of the Scriptures,
46  and he said to them: “In this way it is written that the Christ would suffer and rise from among the dead on the third day,
47  and on the basis of his name repentance for forgiveness of sins would be preached in all the nations—starting out from Jerusalem,
48  YOU are to be witnesses of these things.
49  And, look! I am sending forth upon YOU that which is promised by my Father. YOU, though, abide in the city until YOU become clothed with power from on high.”
50  But he led them out as far as Bethany, and he lifted up his hands and blessed them.
51  As he was blessing them he was parted from them and began to be borne up to heaven.
52  And they did obeisance to him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy.
53  And they were continually in the temple blessing God.
john 1
1  In [the] beginning the Word was, and the Word was with God, and the Word was a god.
2  This one was in [the] beginning with God.
3  All things came into existence through him, and apart from him not even one thing came into existence. What has come into existence
4  by means of him was life, and the life was the light of men.
5  And the light is shining in the darkness, but the darkness has not overpowered it.
6  There arose a man that was sent forth as a representative of God: his name was John.
7  This [man] came for a witness, in order to bear witness about the light, that people of all sorts might believe through him.
8  He was not that light, but he was meant to bear witness about that light.
9  The true light that gives light to every sort of man was about to come into the world.
10  He was in the world, and the world came into existence through him, but the world did not know him.
11  He came to his own home, but his own people did not take him in.
12  However, as many as did receive him, to them he gave authority to become God’s children, because they were exercising faith in his name; 
13  and they were born, not from blood or from a fleshly will or from man’s will, but from God.
14  So the Word became flesh and resided among us, and we had a view of his glory, a glory such as belongs to an only-begotten son from a father;  and he was full of undeserved kindness and truth.
15  (John bore witness about him, yes, he actually cried out—this was the one who said [it]—saying: “The one coming behind me has advanced in front of me, because he existed before me.”)
16  For we all received from out of his fullness, even undeserved kindness upon undeserved kindness.
17  Because the Law was given through Moses, the undeserved kindness and the truth came to be through Jesus Christ.
18  No man has seen God at any time;  the only-begotten god who is in the bosom [position] with the Father is the one that has explained him.
19  Now this is the witness of John when the Jews sent forth priests and Levites from Jerusalem to him to ask him: “Who are you?”
20  And he confessed and did not deny, but confessed: “I am not the Christ.”
21  And they asked him: “What, then? Are you Elijah?” And he said: “I am not.” “Are you The Prophet?” And he answered: “No!”
22  Therefore they said to him: “Who are you? that we may give an answer to those who sent us. What do you say about yourself?”
23  He said: “I am a voice of someone crying out in the wilderness, ‘MAKE the way of Jehovah straight,’ just as Isaiah the prophet said.”
24  Now those sent forth were from the Pharisees.
25  So they questioned him and said to him: “Why, then, do you baptize if you yourself are not the Christ or Elijah or The Prophet?”
26  John answered them, saying: “I baptize in water. In the midst of YOU one is standing whom YOU do not know,
27  the one coming behind me, but the lace of whose sandal I am not worthy to untie.”
28  These things took place in Bethany across the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
29  The next day he beheld Jesus coming toward him, and he said: “See, the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world!
30  This is the one about whom I said, Behind me there comes a man who has advanced in front of me, because he existed before me.
31  Even I did not know him, but the reason why I came baptizing in water was that he might be made manifest to Israel.”
32  John also bore witness, saying: “I viewed the spirit coming down as a dove out of heaven, and it remained upon him.
33  Even I did not know him, but the very One who sent me to baptize in water said to me, ‘Whoever it is upon whom you see the spirit coming down and remaining, this is the one that baptizes in holy spirit.’
34  And I have seen [it], and I have borne witness that this one is the Son of God.”
35  Again the next day John was standing with two of his disciples,
36  and as he looked at Jesus walking he said: “See, the Lamb of God!”
37  And the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus.
38  Then Jesus turned and, getting a view of them following, he said to them: “What are YOU looking for?” They said to him: “Rabbi, (which means, when translated, Teacher,) where are you staying?”
39  He said to them: “Come, and YOU will see.” Accordingly they went and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day;  it was about the tenth hour.
40  Andrew the brother of Simon Peter was one of the two that heard what John said and followed [Jesus].
41  First this one found his own brother, Simon, and said to him: “We have found the Messiah” (which means, when translated, Christ).
42  He led him to Jesus. When Jesus looked upon him he said: “You are Simon the son of John;  you will be called Cephas” (which is translated Peter).
43  The next day he desired to depart for Galilee. So Jesus found Philip and said to him: “Be my follower.”
44  Now Philip was from Bethsaida, from the city of Andrew and Peter.
45  Philip found Nathanael and said to him: “We have found the one of whom Moses, in the Law, and the Prophets wrote, Jesus, the son of Joseph, from Nazareth.”
46  But Nathanael said to him: “Can anything good come out of Nazareth?” Philip said to him: “Come and see.”
47  Jesus saw Nathanael coming toward him and said about him: “See, an Israelite for a certainty, in whom there is no deceit.”
48  Nathanael said to him: “How does it come that you know me?” Jesus in answer said to him: “Before Philip called you, while you were under the fig tree, I saw you.”
49  Nathanael answered him: “Rabbi, you are the Son of God, you are King of Israel.”
50  Jesus in answer said to him: “Because I told you I saw you underneath the fig tree do you believe? You will see things greater than these.”
51  He further said to him: “Most truly I say to YOU men, YOU will see heaven opened up and the angels of God ascending and descending to the Son of man.”
john 2
2  Now on the third day a marriage feast took place in Cana of Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there.
2  Jesus and his disciples were also invited to the marriage feast.
3  When the wine ran short the mother of Jesus said to him: “They have no wine.”
4  But Jesus said to her: “What have I to do with you, woman? My hour has not yet come.”
5  His mother said to those ministering: “Whatever he tells YOU, do.”
6  As it was, there were six stone water jars sitting there as required by the purification rules of the Jews, each able to hold two or three liquid measures.
7  Jesus said to them: “Fill the water jars with water.” And they filled them to the brim.
8  And he said to them: “Draw some out now and take it to the director of the feast.” So they took it.
9  When, now, the director of the feast tasted the water that had been turned into wine but did not know what its source was, although those ministering who had drawn out the water knew, the director of the feast called the bridegroom
10  and said to him: “Every other man puts out the fine wine first, and when people are intoxicated, the inferior. You have reserved the fine wine until now.”
11  Jesus performed this in Cana of Galilee as [the] beginning of his signs, and he made his glory manifest;  and his disciples put their faith in him.
12  After this he and his mother and brothers and his disciples went down to Capernaum, but they did not stay there many days.
13  Now the passover of the Jews was near, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
14  And he found in the temple those selling cattle and sheep and doves and the money brokers in their seats.
15  So, after making a whip of ropes, he drove all those with the sheep and cattle out of the temple, and he poured out the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables.
16  And he said to those selling the doves: “Take these things away from here! Stop making the house of my Father a house of merchandise!”
17  His disciples called to mind that it is written: “The zeal for your house will eat me up.”
18  Therefore, in answer, the Jews said to him: “What sign have you to show us, since you are doing these things?”
19  In answer Jesus said to them: “Break down this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.”
20  Therefore the Jews said: “This temple was built in forty-six years, and will you raise it up in three days?”
21  But he was talking about the temple of his body.
22  When, though, he was raised up from the dead, his disciples called to mind that he used to say this;  and they believed the Scripture and the saying that Jesus said.
23  However, when he was in Jerusalem at the passover, at its festival, many people put their faith in his name, viewing his signs that he was performing.
24  But Jesus himself was not entrusting himself to them because of his knowing them all
25  and because he was in no need to have anyone bear witness about man, for he himself knew what was in man.
john 3
3  Now there was a man of the Pharisees, Nicodemus was his name, a ruler of the Jews.
2  This one came to him in the night and said to him: “Rabbi, we know that you as a teacher have come from God;  for no one can perform these signs that you perform unless God is with him.”
3  In answer Jesus said to him: “Most truly I say to you, Unless anyone is born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.”
4  Nicodemus said to him: “How can a man be born when he is old? He cannot enter into the womb of his mother a second time and be born, can he?”
5  Jesus answered: “Most truly I say to you, Unless anyone is born from water and spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.
6  What has been born from the flesh is flesh, and what has been born from the spirit is spirit.
7  Do not marvel because I told you, YOU people must be born again.
8  The wind blows where it wants to, and you hear the sound of it, but you do not know where it comes from and where it is going. So is everyone that has been born from the spirit.”
9  In answer Nicodemus said to him: “How can these things come about?”
10  In answer Jesus said to him: “Are you a teacher of Israel and yet do not know these things?
11  Most truly I say to you, What we know we speak and what we have seen we bear witness of, but YOU people do not receive the witness we give.
12  If I have told YOU earthly things and yet YOU do not believe, how will YOU believe if I tell YOU heavenly things?
13  Moreover, no man has ascended into heaven but he that descended from heaven, the Son of man.
14  And just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so the Son of man must be lifted up,
15  that everyone believing in him may have everlasting life.
16  “For God loved the world so much that he gave his only-begotten Son, in order that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.
17  For God sent forth his Son into the world, not for him to judge the world, but for the world to be saved through him.
18  He that exercises faith in him is not to be judged. He that does not exercise faith has been judged already, because he has not exercised faith in the name of the only-begotten Son of God.
19  Now this is the basis for judgment, that the light has come into the world but men have loved the darkness rather than the light, for their works were wicked.
20  For he that practices vile things hates the light and does not come to the light, in order that his works may not be reproved.
21  But he that does what is true comes to the light, in order that his works may be made manifest as having been worked in harmony with God.”
22  After these things Jesus and his disciples went into Judean country, and there he spent some time with them and did baptizing.
23  But John also was baptizing in Aenon near Salim, because there was a great quantity of water there, and people kept coming and being baptized; 
24  for John had not yet been thrown into prison.
25  Therefore a dispute arose on the part of the disciples of John with a Jew concerning purification.
26  So they came to John and said to him: “Rabbi, the man that was with you across the Jordan, to whom you have borne witness, see, this one is baptizing and all are going to him.”
27  In answer John said: “A man cannot receive a single thing unless it has been given him from heaven.
28  YOU yourselves bear me witness that I said, I am not the Christ, but, I have been sent forth in advance of that one.
29  He that has the bride is the bridegroom. However, the friend of the bridegroom, when he stands and hears him, has a great deal of joy on account of the voice of the bridegroom. Therefore this joy of mine has been made full.
30  That one must go on increasing, but I must go on decreasing.”
31  He that comes from above is over all others. He that is from the earth is from the earth and speaks of things of the earth. He that comes from heaven is over all others.
32  What he has seen and heard, of this he bears witness, but no man is accepting his witness.
33  He that has accepted his witness has put his seal to it that God is true.
34  For the one whom God sent forth speaks the sayings of God, for he does not give the spirit by measure.
35  The Father loves the Son and has given all things into his hand.
36  He that exercises faith in the Son has everlasting life;  he that disobeys the Son will not see life, but the wrath of God remains upon him.
john 4
4  When, now, the Lord became aware that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John—
2  although, indeed, Jesus himself did no baptizing but his disciples did—
3  he left Judea and departed again for Galilee.
4  But it was necessary for him to go through Samaria.
5  Accordingly he came to a city of Samaria called Sychar near the field that Jacob gave to Joseph his son.
6  In fact, Jacob’s fountain was there. Now Jesus, tired out from the journey, was sitting at the fountain just as he was. The hour was about the sixth.
7  A woman of Samaria came to draw water. Jesus said to her: “Give me a drink.”
8  (For his disciples had gone off into the city to buy foodstuffs.)
9  Therefore the Samaritan woman said to him: “How is it that you, despite being a Jew, ask me for a drink, when I am a Samaritan woman?” (For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.)
10  In answer Jesus said to her: “If you had known the free gift of God and who it is that says to you, ‘Give me a drink,’ you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water.”
11  She said to him: “Sir, you have not even a bucket for drawing water, and the well is deep. From what source, therefore, do you have this living water?
12  You are not greater than our forefather Jacob, who gave us the well and who himself together with his sons and his cattle drank out of it, are you?”
13  In answer Jesus said to her: “Everyone drinking from this water will get thirsty again.
14  Whoever drinks from the water that I will give him will never get thirsty at all, but the water that I will give him will become in him a fountain of water bubbling up to impart everlasting life.”
15  The woman said to him: “Sir, give me this water, so that I may neither thirst nor keep coming over to this place to draw water.”
16  He said to her: “Go, call your husband and come to this place.”
17  In answer the woman said: “I do not have a husband.” Jesus said to her: “You said well, ‘A husband I do not have.’
18  For you have had five husbands, and the [man] you now have is not your husband. This you have said truthfully.”
19  The woman said to him: “Sir, I perceive you are a prophet.
20  Our forefathers worshiped in this mountain;  but YOU people say that in Jerusalem is the place where persons ought to worship.”
21  Jesus said to her: “Believe me, woman, The hour is coming when neither in this mountain nor in Jerusalem will YOU people worship the Father.
22  YOU worship what YOU do not know;  we worship what we know, because salvation originates with the Jews.
23  Nevertheless, the hour is coming, and it is now, when the true worshipers will worship the Father with spirit and truth, for, indeed, the Father is looking for suchlike ones to worship him.
24  God is a Spirit, and those worshiping him must worship with spirit and truth.”
25  The woman said to him: “I know that Messiah is coming, who is called Christ. Whenever that one arrives, he will declare all things to us openly.”
26  Jesus said to her: “I who am speaking to you am he.”
27  Now at this point his disciples arrived, and they began to wonder because he was speaking with a woman. Of course, no one said: “What are you looking for?” or, “Why do you talk with her?”
28  The woman, therefore, left her water jar and went off into the city and told the men:
29  “Come here, see a man that told me all the things I did. This is not perhaps the Christ, is it?”
30  They went out of the city and began coming to him.
31  Meanwhile the disciples were urging him, saying: “Rabbi, eat.”
32  But he said to them: “I have food to eat of which YOU do not know.”
33  Therefore the disciples began saying to one another: “No one has brought him anything to eat, has he?”
34  Jesus said to them: “My food is for me to do the will of him that sent me and to finish his work.
35  Do YOU not say that there are yet four months before the harvest comes? Look! I say to YOU: Lift up YOUR eyes and view the fields, that they are white for harvesting. Already
36  the reaper is receiving wages and gathering fruit for everlasting life, so that the sower and the reaper may rejoice together.
37  In this respect, indeed, the saying is true, One is the sower and another the reaper.
38  I dispatched YOU to reap what YOU have spent no labor on. Others have labored, and YOU have entered into the benefit of their labor.”
39  Now many of the Samaritans out of that city put faith in him on account of the word of the woman who said in witness: “He told me all the things I did.”
40  Therefore when the Samaritans came to him, they began asking him to stay with them;  and he stayed there two days.
41  Consequently many more believed on account of what he said,
42  and they began to say to the woman: “We do not believe any longer on account of your talk;  for we have heard for ourselves and we know that this man is for a certainty the savior of the world.”
43  After the two days he left there for Galilee.
44  Jesus himself, however, bore witness that in his own homeland a prophet has no honor.
45  When, therefore, he arrived in Galilee, the Galileans received him, because they had seen all the things he did in Jerusalem at the festival, for they also had gone to the festival.
46  Accordingly he came again to Cana of Galilee, where he had turned the water into wine. Now there was a certain attendant of the king whose son was sick in Capernaum.
47  When this man heard that Jesus had come out of Judea into Galilee, he went off to him and began asking him to come down and heal his son, for he was at the point of dying.
48  However, Jesus said to him: “Unless YOU people see signs and wonders, YOU will by no means believe.”
49  The attendant of the king said to him: “Lord, come down before my young child dies.”
50  Jesus said to him: “Go your way;  your son lives.” The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him and went his way.
51  But already while he was on his way down his slaves met him to say that his boy was living.
52  Therefore he began to inquire of them the hour in which he got better in health. Accordingly they said to him: “Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.”
53  Therefore the father knew it was in the very hour that Jesus said to him: “Your son lives.” And he and his whole household believed.
54  Again this was the second sign Jesus performed when he came out of Judea into Galilee.
john 5
5  After these things there was a festival of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
2  Now in Jerusalem at the sheepgate there is a pool designated in Hebrew Bethzatha, with five colonnades.
3  In these a multitude of the sick, blind, lame and those with withered members, was lying down.
4  ——
5  But a certain man was there who had been in his sickness for thirty-eight years.
6  Seeing this man lying down, and being aware that he had already been [sick] a long time, Jesus said to him: “Do you want to become sound in health?”
7  The sick man answered him: “Sir, I do not have a man to put me into the pool when the water is disturbed;  but while I am coming another steps down ahead of me.”
8  Jesus said to him: “Get up, pick up your cot and walk.”
9  With that the man immediately became sound in health, and he picked up his cot and began to walk. Now on that day it was a sabbath.
10  Therefore the Jews began to say to the cured man: “It is Sabbath, and it is not lawful for you to carry the cot.”
11  But he answered them: “The very one that made me sound in health said to me, ‘Pick up your cot and walk.’”
12  They asked him: “Who is the man that told you, ‘Pick it up and walk’?”
13  But the healed man did not know who he was, for Jesus had turned aside, there being a crowd in the place.
14  After these things Jesus found him in the temple and said to him: “See, you have become sound in health. Do not sin anymore, in order that something worse does not happen to you.”
15  The man went away and told the Jews it was Jesus that made him sound in health.
16  So on this account the Jews went persecuting Jesus, because he was doing these things during Sabbath.
17  But he answered them: “My Father has kept working until now, and I keep working.”
18  On this account, indeed, the Jews began seeking all the more to kill him, because not only was he breaking the Sabbath but he was also calling God his own Father, making himself equal to God.
19  Therefore, in answer, Jesus went on to say to them: “Most truly I say to YOU, The Son cannot do a single thing of his own initiative, but only what he beholds the Father doing. For whatever things that One does, these things the Son also does in like manner.
20  For the Father has affection for the Son and shows him all the things he himself does, and he will show him works greater than these, in order that YOU may marvel.
21  For just as the Father raises the dead up and makes them alive, so the Son also makes those alive whom he wants to.
22  For the Father judges no one at all, but he has committed all the judging to the Son,
23  in order that all may honor the Son just as they honor the Father. He that does not honor the Son does not honor the Father who sent him.
24  Most truly I say to YOU, He that hears my word and believes him that sent me has everlasting life, and he does not come into judgment but has passed over from death to life.
25  “Most truly I say to YOU, The hour is coming, and it is now, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God and those who have given heed will live.
26  For just as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted also to the Son to have life in himself.
27  And he has given him authority to do judging, because Son of man he is.
28  Do not marvel at this, because the hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice
29  and come out, those who did good things to a resurrection of life, those who practiced vile things to a resurrection of judgment.
30  I cannot do a single thing of my own initiative;  just as I hear, I judge;  and the judgment that I render is righteous, because I seek, not my own will, but the will of him that sent me.
31  “If I alone bear witness about myself, my witness is not true.
32  There is another that bears witness about me, and I know that the witness which he bears about me is true.
33  YOU have dispatched men to John, and he has borne witness to the truth.
34  However, I do not accept the witness from man, but I say these things that YOU may be saved.
35  That man was a burning and shining lamp, and YOU for a short time were willing to rejoice greatly in his light.
36  But I have the witness greater than that of John, for the very works that my Father assigned me to accomplish, the works themselves that I am doing, bear witness about me that the Father dispatched me.
37  Also, the Father who sent me has himself borne witness about me. YOU have neither heard his voice at any time nor seen his figure; 
38  and YOU do not have his word remaining in YOU, because the very one whom he dispatched YOU do not believe.
39  “YOU are searching the Scriptures, because YOU think that by means of them YOU will have everlasting life;  and these are the very ones that bear witness about me.
40  And yet YOU do not want to come to me that YOU may have life.
41  I do not accept glory from men,
42  but I well know that YOU do not have the love of God in YOU.
43  I have come in the name of my Father, but YOU do not receive me;  if someone else arrived in his own name, YOU would receive that one.
44  How can YOU believe, when YOU are accepting glory from one another and YOU are not seeking the glory that is from the only God?
45  Do not think that I will accuse YOU to the Father;  there is one that accuses YOU, Moses, in whom YOU have put YOUR hope.
46  In fact, if YOU believed Moses YOU would believe me, for that one wrote about me.
47  But if YOU do not believe the writings of that one, how will YOU believe my sayings?”
john 6
6  After these things Jesus departed across the sea of Galilee, or Tiberias.
2  But a great crowd kept following him, because they were beholding the signs he was performing upon those who were ill.
3  So Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he was sitting with his disciples.
4  Now the passover, the festival of the Jews, was near.
5  When, therefore, Jesus raised his eyes and observed that a great crowd was coming to him, he said to Philip: “Where shall we buy loaves for these to eat?”
6  However, he was saying this to test him, for he himself knew what he was about to do.
7  Philip answered him: “Two hundred denarii worth of loaves is not enough for them, so that each one may get a little.”
8  One of his disciples, Andrew the brother of Simon Peter, said to him:
9  “Here is a little boy that has five barley loaves and two small fishes. But what are these among so many?”
10  Jesus said: “HAVE the men recline as at meal.” Now there was a lot of grass in the place. Therefore the men reclined, about five thousand in number.
11  So Jesus took the loaves and, after giving thanks, he distributed them to those reclining, likewise also as much of the small fishes as they wanted.
12  But when they had their fill he said to his disciples: “Gather together the fragments that remain over, so that nothing is wasted.”
13  Therefore they gathered them together, and they filled twelve baskets with fragments from the five barley loaves, which were left over by those who had eaten.
14  Hence when the men saw the signs he performed, they began to say: “This is for a certainty the prophet that was to come into the world.”
15  Therefore Jesus, knowing they were about to come and seize him to make him king, withdrew again into the mountain all alone.
16  When evening fell, his disciples went down to the sea,
17  and, boarding a boat, they set out across the sea for Capernaum. Well, by now it had grown dark and Jesus had not yet come to them.
18  Also, the sea began to be stirred up because a strong wind was blowing.
19  However, when they had rowed about three or four miles, they beheld Jesus walking upon the sea and getting near the boat;  and they became fearful.
20  But he said to them: “It is I;  have no fear!”
21  Therefore they were willing to take him into the boat, and directly the boat was at the land to which they were trying to go.
22  The next day the crowd that was standing on the other side of the sea saw that there was no boat there except a little one, and that Jesus had not entered into the boat with his disciples but that only his disciples had left; 
23  but boats from Tiberias arrived near the place where they ate the bread after the Lord had given thanks.
24  Therefore when the crowd saw that neither Jesus was there nor his disciples, they boarded their little boats and came to Capernaum to look for Jesus.
25  So when they found him across the sea they said to him: “Rabbi, when did you get here?”
26  Jesus answered them and said: “Most truly I say to YOU, YOU are looking for me, not because YOU saw signs, but because YOU ate from the loaves and were satisfied.
27  Work, not for the food that perishes, but for the food that remains for life everlasting, which the Son of man will give YOU;  for upon this one the Father, even God, has put his seal [of approval].”
28  Therefore they said to him: “What shall we do to work the works of God?”
29  In answer Jesus said to them: “This is the work of God, that YOU exercise faith in him whom that One sent forth.”
30  Therefore they said to him: “What, then, are you performing as a sign, in order for us to see [it] and believe you? What work are you doing?
31  Our forefathers ate the manna in the wilderness, just as it is written, ‘He gave them bread from heaven to eat.’”
32  Hence Jesus said to them: “Most truly I say to YOU, Moses did not give YOU the bread from heaven, but my Father does give YOU the true bread from heaven.
33  For the bread of God is the one who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.”
34  Therefore they said to him: “Lord, always give us this bread.”
35  Jesus said to them: “I am the bread of life. He that comes to me will not get hungry at all, and he that exercises faith in me will never get thirsty at all.
36  But I have said to YOU, YOU have even seen me and yet do not believe.
37  Everything the Father gives me will come to me, and the one that comes to me I will by no means drive away; 
38  because I have come down from heaven to do, not my will, but the will of him that sent me.
39  This is the will of him that sent me, that I should lose nothing out of all that he has given me but that I should resurrect it at the last day.
40  For this is the will of my Father, that everyone that beholds the Son and exercises faith in him should have everlasting life, and I will resurrect him at the last day.”
41  Therefore the Jews began to murmur at him because he said: “I am the bread that came down from heaven”; 
42  and they began saying: “Is this not Jesus the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How is it that now he says, ‘I have come down from heaven’?”
43  In answer Jesus said to them: “Stop murmuring among yourselves.
44  No man can come to me unless the Father, who sent me, draws him;  and I will resurrect him in the last day.
45  It is written in the Prophets, ‘And they will all be taught by Jehovah.’ Everyone that has heard from the Father and has learned comes to me.
46  Not that any man has seen the Father, except he who is from God;  this one has seen the Father.
47  Most truly I say to YOU, He that believes has everlasting life.
48  “I am the bread of life.
49  YOUR forefathers ate the manna in the wilderness and yet died.
50  This is the bread that comes down from heaven, so that anyone may eat of it and not die.
51  I am the living bread that came down from heaven;  if anyone eats of this bread he will live forever;  and, for a fact, the bread that I shall give is my flesh in behalf of the life of the world.”
52  Therefore the Jews began contending with one another, saying: “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?”
53  Accordingly Jesus said to them: “Most truly I say to YOU, Unless YOU eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, YOU have no life in yourselves.
54  He that feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood has everlasting life, and I shall resurrect him at the last day; 
55  for my flesh is true food, and my blood is true drink.
56  He that feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood remains in union with me, and I in union with him.
57  Just as the living Father sent me forth and I live because of the Father, he also that feeds on me, even that one will live because of me.
58  This is the bread that came down from heaven. It is not as when YOUR forefathers ate and yet died. He that feeds on this bread will live forever.”
59  These things he said as he was teaching in public assembly at Capernaum.
60  Therefore many of his disciples, when they heard this, said: “This speech is shocking;  who can listen to it?”
61  But Jesus, knowing in himself that his disciples were murmuring about this, said to them: “Does this stumble YOU?
62  What, therefore, if YOU should behold the Son of man ascending to where he was before?
63  It is the spirit that is life-giving;  the flesh is of no use at all. The sayings that I have spoken to YOU are spirit and are life.
64  But there are some of YOU that do not believe.” For from [the] beginning Jesus knew who were the ones not believing and who was the one that would betray him.
65  So he went on to say: “This is why I have said to YOU, No one can come to me unless it is granted him by the Father.”
66  Owing to this many of his disciples went off to the things behind and would no longer walk with him.
67  Therefore Jesus said to the twelve: “YOU do not want to go also, do YOU?”
68  Simon Peter answered him: “Lord, whom shall we go away to? You have sayings of everlasting life; 
69  and we have believed and come to know that you are the Holy One of God.”
70  Jesus answered them: “I chose YOU twelve, did I not? Yet one of YOU is a slanderer.”
71  He was, in fact, speaking of Judas [the son] of Simon Iscariot;  for this one was going to betray him, although one of the twelve.
john 7
7  Now after these things Jesus continued walking about in Galilee, for he did not want to walk about in Judea, because the Jews were seeking to kill him.
2  However, the festival of the Jews, the festival of tabernacles, was near.
3  Therefore his brothers said to him: “Pass on over from here and go into Judea, in order that your disciples also may behold the works you do.
4  For nobody does anything in secret while himself seeking to be known publicly. If you do these things, manifest yourself to the world.”
5  His brothers were, in fact, not exercising faith in him.
6  Therefore Jesus said to them: “My due time is not yet present, but YOUR due time is always at hand.
7  The world has no reason to hate YOU, but it hates me, because I bear witness concerning it that its works are wicked.
8  YOU go up to the festival;  I am not yet going up to this festival, because my due time has not yet fully come.”
9  So after he told them these things, he remained in Galilee.
10  But when his brothers had gone up to the festival, then he also went up himself, not openly but as in secret.
11  Therefore the Jews began looking for him at the festival and saying: “Where is that [man]?”
12  And there was a lot of subdued talk about him among the crowds. Some would say: “He is a good man.” Others would say: “He is not, but he misleads the crowd.”
13  No one, of course, would speak about him publicly because of the fear of the Jews.
14  When by now the festival was half over, Jesus went up into the temple and began teaching.
15  Therefore the Jews fell to wondering, saying: “How does this man have a knowledge of letters, when he has not studied at the schools?”
16  Jesus, in turn, answered them and said: “What I teach is not mine, but belongs to him that sent me.
17  If anyone desires to do His will, he will know concerning the teaching whether it is from God or I speak of my own originality.
18  He that speaks of his own originality is seeking his own glory;  but he that seeks the glory of him that sent him, this one is true, and there is no unrighteousness in him.
19  Moses gave YOU the Law, did he not? But not one of YOU obeys the Law. Why are YOU seeking to kill me?”
20  The crowd answered: “You have a demon. Who is seeking to kill you?”
21  In answer Jesus said to them: “One deed I performed, and YOU are all wondering.
22  For this reason Moses has given YOU the circumcision—not that it is from Moses, but that it is from the forefathers—and YOU circumcise a man on a sabbath.
23  If a man receives circumcision on a sabbath in order that the law of Moses may not be broken, are YOU violently angry at me because I made a man completely sound in health on a sabbath?
24  Stop judging from the outward appearance, but judge with righteous judgment.”
25  Therefore some of the inhabitants of Jerusalem began to say: “This is the man they are seeking to kill, is it not?
26  And yet, see! he is speaking in public, and they say nothing to him. The rulers have not come to know for a certainty that this is the Christ, have they?
27  On the contrary, we know where this man is from;  yet when the Christ comes, no one is to know where he is from.”
28  Therefore Jesus cried out as he was teaching in the temple and said: “YOU both know me and know where I am from. Also, I have not come of my own initiative, but he that sent me is real, and YOU do not know him.
29  I know him, because I am a representative from him, and that One sent me forth.”
30  Hence they began seeking to get hold of him, but no one laid a hand upon him, because his hour had not yet come.
31  Still, many of the crowd put faith in him;  and they commenced saying: “When the Christ arrives, he will not perform more signs than this man has performed, will he?”
32  The Pharisees heard the crowd murmuring these things about him, and the chief priests and the Pharisees dispatched officers to get hold of him.
33  Therefore Jesus said: “I continue a little while longer with YOU before I go to him that sent me.
34  YOU will look for me, but YOU will not find me, and where I am YOU cannot come.”
35  Therefore the Jews said among themselves: “Where does this [man] intend going, so that we shall not find him? He does not intend to go to the [Jews] dispersed among the Greeks and teach the Greeks, does he?
36  What does this saying mean that he said, ‘YOU will look for me, but YOU will not find me, and where I am YOU cannot come’?”
37  Now on the last day, the great day of the festival, Jesus was standing up and he cried out, saying: “If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink.
38  He that puts faith in me, just as the Scripture has said, ‘Out from his inmost part streams of living water will flow.’”
39  However, he said this concerning the spirit which those who put faith in him were about to receive;  for as yet there was no spirit, because Jesus had not yet been glorified.
40  Therefore some of the crowd that heard these words began saying: “This is for a certainty The Prophet.”
41  Others were saying: “This is the Christ.” But some were saying: “The Christ is not actually coming out of Galilee, is he?
42  Has not the Scripture said that the Christ is coming from the offspring of David, and from Bethlehem the village where David used to be?”
43  Therefore a division over him developed among the crowd.
44  Some of them, though, were wanting to get hold of him, but no one did lay [his] hands upon him.
45  Therefore the officers went back to the chief priests and Pharisees, and the latter said to them: “Why is it YOU did not bring him in?”
46  The officers replied: “Never has [another] man spoken like this.”
47  In turn the Pharisees answered: “YOU have not been misled also, have YOU?
48  Not one of the rulers or of the Pharisees has put faith in him, has he?
49  But this crowd that does not know the Law are accursed people.”
50  Nicodemus, who had come to him previously, and who was one of them, said to them:
51  “Our law does not judge a man unless first it has heard from him and come to know what he is doing, does it?”
52  In answer they said to him: “You are not also out of Galilee, are you? Search and see that no prophet is to be raised up out of Galilee.”
53  So they went each one to his home.
john 8
8  But Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.
2  At daybreak, however, he again presented himself at the temple, and all the people began coming to him, and he sat down and began to teach them.
3  Now the scribes and the Pharisees brought a woman caught at adultery, and, after standing her in their midst,
4  they said to him: “Teacher, this woman has been caught in the act of committing adultery.
5  In the Law Moses prescribed for us to stone such sort of women. What, really, do you say?”
6  Of course, they were saying this to put him to the test, in order to have something with which to accuse him. But Jesus bent down and began to write with his finger in the ground.
7  When they persisted in asking him, he straightened up and said to them: “Let the one of YOU that is sinless be the first to throw a stone at her.”
8  And bending over again he kept on writing in the ground.
9  But those who heard this began going out, one by one, starting with the older men, and he was left alone, and the woman that was in their midst.
10  Straightening up, Jesus said to her: “Woman, where are they? Did no one condemn you?”
11  She said: “No one, sir.” Jesus said: “Neither do I condemn you. Go your way;  from now on practice sin no more.”
12  Therefore Jesus spoke again to them, saying: “I am the light of the world. He that follows me will by no means walk in darkness, but will possess the light of life.”
13  Hence the Pharisees said to him: “You bear witness about yourself;  your witness is not true.”
14  In answer Jesus said to them: “Even if I do bear witness about myself, my witness is true, because I know where I came from and where I am going. But YOU do not know where I came from and where I am going.
15  YOU judge according to the flesh;  I do not judge any man at all.
16  And yet if I do judge, my judgment is truthful, because I am not alone, but the Father who sent me is with me.
17  Also, in YOUR own Law it is written, ‘The witness of two men is true.’
18  I am one that bears witness about myself, and the Father who sent me bears witness about me.”
19  Therefore they went on to say to him: “Where is your Father?” Jesus answered: “YOU know neither me nor my Father. If YOU did know me, YOU would know my Father also.”
20  These sayings he spoke in the treasury as he was teaching in the temple. But no one laid hold of him, because his hour had not yet come.
21  Hence he said to them again: “I am going away, and YOU will look for me, and yet YOU will die in YOUR sin. Where I am going YOU cannot come.”
22  Therefore the Jews began to say: “He will not kill himself, will he? Because he says, ‘Where I am going YOU cannot come.’”
23  So he went on to say to them: “YOU are from the realms below;  I am from the realms above. YOU are from this world;  I am not from this world.
24  Therefore I said to YOU, YOU will die in YOUR sins. For if YOU do not believe that I am [he], YOU will die in YOUR sins.”
25  Therefore they began to say to him: “Who are you?” Jesus said to them: “Why am I even speaking to YOU at all?
26  I have many things to speak concerning YOU and to pass judgment upon. As a matter of fact, he that sent me is true, and the very things I heard from him I am speaking in the world.”
27  They did not grasp that he was talking to them about the Father.
28  Therefore Jesus said: “When once YOU have lifted up the Son of man, then YOU will know that I am [he], and that I do nothing of my own initiative;  but just as the Father taught me I speak these things.
29  And he that sent me is with me;  he did not abandon me to myself, because I always do the things pleasing to him.”
30  As he was speaking these things, many put faith in him.
31  And so Jesus went on to say to the Jews that had believed him: “If YOU remain in my word, YOU are really my disciples,
32  and YOU will know the truth, and the truth will set YOU free.”
33  They replied to him: “We are Abraham’s offspring and never have we been slaves to anybody. How is it you say, ‘YOU will become free’?”
34  Jesus answered them: “Most truly I say to YOU, Every doer of sin is a slave of sin.
35  Moreover, the slave does not remain in the household forever;  the son remains forever.
36  Therefore if the Son sets YOU free, YOU will be actually free.
37  I know that YOU are Abraham’s offspring;  but YOU are seeking to kill me, because my word makes no progress among YOU.
38  What things I have seen with my Father I speak;  and YOU, therefore, do the things YOU have heard from [YOUR] father.”
39  In answer they said to him: “Our father is Abraham.” Jesus said to them: “If YOU are Abraham’s children, do the works of Abraham.
40  But now YOU are seeking to kill me, a man that has told YOU the truth that I heard from God. Abraham did not do this.
41  YOU do the works of YOUR father.” They said to him: “We were not born from fornication;  we have one Father, God.”
42  Jesus said to them: “If God were YOUR Father, YOU would love me, for from God I came forth and am here. Neither have I come of my own initiative at all, but that One sent me forth.
43  Why is it YOU do not know what I am speaking? Because YOU cannot listen to my word.
44  YOU are from YOUR father the Devil, and YOU wish to do the desires of YOUR father. That one was a manslayer when he began, and he did not stand fast in the truth, because truth is not in him. When he speaks the lie, he speaks according to his own disposition, because he is a liar and the father of [the lie].
45  Because I, on the other hand, tell the truth, YOU do not believe me.
46  Who of YOU convicts me of sin? If I speak truth, why is it YOU do not believe me?
47  He that is from God listens to the sayings of God. This is why YOU do not listen, because YOU are not from God.”
48  In answer the Jews said to him: “Do we not rightly say, You are a Samaritan and have a demon?”
49  Jesus answered: “I do not have a demon, but I honor my Father, and YOU dishonor me.
50  But I am not seeking glory for myself;  there is One that is seeking and judging.
51  Most truly I say to YOU, If anyone observes my word, he will never see death at all.”
52  The Jews said to him: “Now we do know you have a demon. Abraham died, also the prophets;  but you say, ‘If anyone observes my word, he will never taste death at all.’
53  You are not greater than our father Abraham, who died, are you? Also, the prophets died. Who do you claim to be?”
54  Jesus answered: “If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. It is my Father that glorifies me, he who YOU say is YOUR God; 
55  and yet YOU have not known him. But I know him. And if I said I do not know him I should be like YOU, a liar. But I do know him and am observing his word.
56  Abraham YOUR father rejoiced greatly in the prospect of seeing my day, and he saw it and rejoiced.”
57  Therefore the Jews said to him: “You are not yet fifty years old, and still you have seen Abraham?”
58  Jesus said to them: “Most truly I say to YOU, Before Abraham came into existence, I have been.”
59  Therefore they picked up stones to hurl [them] at him;  but Jesus hid and went out of the temple.
john 9
9  Now as he was passing along he saw a man blind from birth.
2  And his disciples asked him: “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, so that he was born blind?”
3  Jesus answered: “Neither this man sinned nor his parents, but it was in order that the works of God might be made manifest in his case.
4  We must work the works of him that sent me while it is day;  the night is coming when no man can work.
5  As long as I am in the world, I am the world’s light.”
6  After he said these things, he spit on the ground and made a clay with the saliva, and put his clay upon the [man’s] eyes
7  and said to him: “Go wash in the pool of Siloam” (which is translated ‘Sent forth’). And so he went off and washed, and came back seeing.
8  Therefore the neighbors and those who formerly used to see he was a beggar began to say: “This is the man that used to sit and beg, is it not?”
9  Some would say: “This is he.” Others would say: “Not at all, but he is like him.” The man would say: “I am [he].”
10  Consequently they began to say to him: “How, then, were your eyes opened?”
11  He answered: “The man called Jesus made a clay and smeared [it] on my eyes and said to me, ‘Go to Siloam and wash.’ I therefore went and washed and gained sight.”
12  At this they said to him: “Where is that [man]?” He said: “I do not know.”
13  They led the once-blind man himself to the Pharisees.
14  Incidentally it was Sabbath on the day that Jesus made the clay and opened his eyes.
15  This time, therefore, the Pharisees also took up asking him how he gained sight. He said to them: “He put a clay upon my eyes, and I washed and have sight.”
16  Therefore some of the Pharisees began to say: “This is not a man from God, because he does not observe the Sabbath.” Others began to say: “How can a man that is a sinner perform signs of that sort?” So there was a division among them.
17  Hence they said to the blind man again: “What do you say about him, seeing that he opened your eyes?” The [man] said: “He is a prophet.”
18  However, the Jews did not believe concerning him that he had been blind and had gained sight, until they called the parents of the man that gained sight.
19  And they asked them: “Is this YOUR son who YOU say was born blind? How, then, is it he sees at present?”
20  Then in answer his parents said: “We know that this is our son and that he was born blind.
21  But how it is he now sees we do not know, or who opened his eyes we do not know. ASK him. He is of age. He must speak for himself.”
22  His parents said these things because they were in fear of the Jews, for the Jews had already come to an agreement that, if anyone confessed him as Christ, he should get expelled from the synagogue.
23  This is why his parents said: “He is of age. QUESTION him.”
24  Therefore a second time they called the man that had been blind and said to him: “Give glory to God;  we know that this man is a sinner.”
25  In turn he answered: “Whether he is a sinner I do not know. One thing I do know, that, whereas I was blind, I see at present.”
26  Therefore they said to him: “What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?”
27  He answered them: “I told YOU already, and yet YOU did not listen. Why do YOU want to hear it again? YOU do not want to become his disciples also, do YOU?”
28  At this they reviled him and said: “You are a disciple of that [man], but we are disciples of Moses.
29  We know that God has spoken to Moses;  but as for this [man], we do not know where he is from.”
30  In answer the man said to them: “This certainly is a marvel, that YOU do not know where he is from, and yet he opened my eyes.
31  We know that God does not listen to sinners, but if anyone is God-fearing and does his will, he listens to this one.
32  From of old it has never been heard that anyone opened the eyes of one born blind.
33  If this [man] were not from God, he could do nothing at all.”
34  In answer they said to him: “You were altogether born in sins, and yet are you teaching us?” And they threw him out!
35  Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and, on finding him, he said: “Are you putting faith in the Son of man?”
36  The [man] answered: “And who is he, sir, that I may put faith in him?”
37  Jesus said to him: “You have seen him and, besides, he that is speaking with you is that one.”
38  Then he said: “I do put faith [in him], Lord.” And he did obeisance to him.
39  And Jesus said: “For [this] judgment I came into this world: that those not seeing might see and those seeing might become blind.”
40  Those of the Pharisees who were with him heard these things, and they said to him: “We are not blind also, are we?”
41  Jesus said to them: “If YOU were blind, YOU would have no sin. But now YOU say, ‘We see.’ YOUR sin remains.”
john 10
10  “Most truly I say to YOU, He that does not enter into the sheepfold through the door but climbs up some other place, that one is a thief and a plunderer.
2  But he that enters through the door is shepherd of the sheep.
3  The doorkeeper opens to this one, and the sheep listen to his voice, and he calls his own sheep by name and leads them out.
4  When he has got all his own out, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him, because they know his voice.
5  A stranger they will by no means follow but will flee from him, because they do not know the voice of strangers.”
6  Jesus spoke this comparison to them;  but they did not know what the things meant that he was speaking to them.
7  Therefore Jesus said again: “Most truly I say to YOU, I am the door of the sheep.
8  All those that have come in place of me are thieves and plunderers;  but the sheep have not listened to them.
9  I am the door;  whoever enters through me will be saved, and he will go in and out and find pasturage.
10  The thief does not come unless it is to steal and slay and destroy. I have come that they might have life and might have it in abundance.
11  I am the fine shepherd;  the fine shepherd surrenders his soul in behalf of the sheep.
12  The hired man, who is no shepherd and to whom the sheep do not belong as his own, beholds the wolf coming and abandons the sheep and flees—and the wolf snatches them and scatters them—
13  because he is a hired man and does not care for the sheep.
14  I am the fine shepherd, and I know my sheep and my sheep know me,
15  just as the Father knows me and I know the Father;  and I surrender my soul in behalf of the sheep.
16  “And I have other sheep, which are not of this fold;  those also I must bring, and they will listen to my voice, and they will become one flock, one shepherd.
17  This is why the Father loves me, because I surrender my soul, in order that I may receive it again.
18  No man has taken it away from me, but I surrender it of my own initiative. I have authority to surrender it, and I have authority to receive it again. The commandment on this I received from my Father.”
19  Again a division resulted among the Jews because of these words.
20  Many of them were saying: “He has a demon and is mad. Why do YOU listen to him?”
21  Others would say: “These are not the sayings of a demonized man. A demon cannot open blind people’s eyes, can it?”
22  At that time the festival of dedication took place in Jerusalem. It was wintertime,
23  and Jesus was walking in the temple in the colonnade of Solomon.
24  Therefore the Jews encircled him and began to say to him: “How long are you to keep our souls in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us outspokenly.”
25  Jesus answered them: “I told YOU, and yet YOU do not believe. The works that I am doing in the name of my Father, these bear witness about me.
26  But YOU do not believe, because YOU are none of my sheep.
27  My sheep listen to my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
28  And I give them everlasting life, and they will by no means ever be destroyed, and no one will snatch them out of my hand.
29  What my Father has given me is something greater than all other things, and no one can snatch them out of the hand of the Father.
30  I and the Father are one.”
31  Once more the Jews lifted up stones to stone him.
32  Jesus replied to them: “I displayed to YOU many fine works from the Father. For which of those works are YOU stoning me?”
33  The Jews answered him: “We are stoning you, not for a fine work, but for blasphemy, even because you, although being a man, make yourself a god.”
34  Jesus answered them: “Is it not written in your Law, ‘I said: “YOU are gods”’?
35  If he called ‘gods’ those against whom the word of God came, and yet the Scripture cannot be nullified,
36  do YOU say to me whom the Father sanctified and dispatched into the world, ‘You blaspheme,’ because I said, I am God’s Son?
37  If I am not doing the works of my Father, do not believe me.
38  But if I am doing them, even though YOU do not believe me, believe the works, in order that YOU may come to know and may continue knowing that the Father is in union with me and I am in union with the Father.”
39  Therefore they tried again to seize him;  but he got out of their reach.
40  So he went off again across the Jordan to the place where John was baptizing at first, and he stayed there.
41  And many people came to him, and they began saying: “John, indeed, did not perform a single sign, but as many things as John said about this man were all true.”
42  And many put faith in him there.
john 11
11  Now there was a certain man sick, Lazarus of Bethany, of the village of Mary and of Martha her sister.
2  It was, in fact, the Mary that greased the Lord with perfumed oil and wiped his feet dry with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick.
3  Therefore his sisters dispatched word to him, saying: “Lord, see! the one for whom you have affection is sick.”
4  But when Jesus heard it he said: “This sickness is not with death as its object, but is for the glory of God, in order that the Son of God may be glorified through it.”
5  Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
6  However, when he heard that he was sick, then he actually remained two days in the place where he was.
7  Then after this he said to the disciples: “Let us go into Judea again.”
8  The disciples said to him: “Rabbi, just lately the Judeans were seeking to stone you, and are you going there again?”
9  Jesus answered: “There are twelve hours of daylight, are there not? If anyone walks in daylight he does not bump against anything, because he sees the light of this world.
10  But if anyone walks in the night, he bumps against something, because the light is not in him.”
11  He said these things, and after this he said to them: “Lazarus our friend has gone to rest, but I am journeying there to awaken him from sleep.”
12  Therefore the disciples said to him: “Lord, if he has gone to rest, he will get well.”
13  Jesus had spoken, however, about his death. But they imagined he was speaking about taking rest in sleep.
14  At that time, therefore, Jesus said to them outspokenly: “Lazarus has died,
15  and I rejoice on YOUR account that I was not there, in order for YOU to believe. But let us go to him.”
16  Therefore Thomas, who was called The Twin, said to his fellow disciples: “Let us also go, that we may die with him.”
17  Consequently when Jesus arrived, he found he had already been four days in the memorial tomb.
18  Now Bethany was near Jerusalem at a distance of about two miles.
19  Accordingly many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary in order to console them concerning their brother.
20  Therefore Martha, when she heard that Jesus was coming, met him;  but Mary kept sitting at home.
21  Martha therefore said to Jesus: “Lord, if you had been here my brother would not have died.
22  And yet at present I know that as many things as you ask God for, God will give you.”
23  Jesus said to her: “Your brother will rise.”
24  Martha said to him: “I know he will rise in the resurrection on the last day.”
25  Jesus said to her: “I am the resurrection and the life. He that exercises faith in me, even though he dies, will come to life; 
26  and everyone that is living and exercises faith in me will never die at all. Do you believe this?”
27  She said to him: “Yes, Lord;  I have believed that you are the Christ the Son of God, the One coming into the world.”
28  And when she had said this, she went off and called Mary her sister, saying secretly: “The Teacher is present and is calling you.”
29  The latter, when she heard this, got up quickly and was on her way to him.
30  Jesus had not yet, in fact, come into the village, but he was still in the place where Martha met him.
31  Therefore the Jews that were with her in the house and that were consoling her, on seeing Mary rise quickly and go out, followed her, supposing that she was going to the memorial tomb to weep there.
32  And so Mary, when she arrived where Jesus was and caught sight of him, fell at his feet, saying to him: “Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died.”
33  Jesus, therefore, when he saw her weeping and the Jews that came with her weeping, groaned in the spirit and became troubled; 
34  and he said: “Where have YOU laid him?” They said to him: “Lord, come and see.”
35  Jesus gave way to tears.
36  Therefore the Jews began to say: “See, what affection he used to have for him!”
37  But some of them said: “Was not this [man] that opened the eyes of the blind man able to prevent this one from dying?”
38  Hence Jesus, after groaning again within himself, came to the memorial tomb. It was, in fact, a cave, and a stone was lying against it.
39  Jesus said: “TAKE the stone away.” Martha, the sister of the deceased, said to him: “Lord, by now he must smell, for it is four days.”
40  Jesus said to her: “Did I not tell you that if you would believe you would see the glory of God?”
41  Therefore they took the stone away. Now Jesus raised his eyes heavenward and said: “Father, I thank you that you have heard me.
42  True, I knew that you always hear me;  but on account of the crowd standing around I spoke, in order that they might believe that you sent me forth.”
43  And when he had said these things, he cried out with a loud voice: “Lazarus, come on out!”
44  The [man] that had been dead came out with his feet and hands bound with wrappings, and his countenance was bound about with a cloth. Jesus said to them: “Loose him and let him go.”
45  Therefore many of the Jews that had come to Mary and that beheld what he did put faith in him; 
46  but some of them went off to the Pharisees and told them the things Jesus did.
47  Consequently the chief priests and the Pharisees gathered the Sanhedrin together and began to say: “What are we to do, because this man performs many signs?
48  If we let him alone this way, they will all put faith in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation.”
49  But a certain one of them, Caiaphas, who was high priest that year, said to them: “YOU do not know anything at all,
50  and YOU do not reason out that it is to YOUR benefit for one man to die in behalf of the people and not for the whole nation to be destroyed.”
51  This, though, he did not say of his own originality;  but because he was high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus was destined to die for the nation,
52  and not for the nation only, but in order that the children of God who are scattered about he might also gather together in one.
53  Therefore from that day on they took counsel to kill him.
54  Hence Jesus no longer walked about publicly among the Jews, but he departed from there to the country near the wilderness, into a city called Ephraim, and there he remained with the disciples.
55  Now the passover of the Jews was near, and many people went up out of the country to Jerusalem before the passover in order to cleanse themselves ceremonially.
56  Therefore they went looking for Jesus and they would say to one another as they stood around in the temple: “What is YOUR opinion? That he will not come to the festival at all?”
57  As it was, the chief priests and the Pharisees had given orders that if anyone got to know where he was, he should disclose [it], in order that they might seize him.
john 12
12  Accordingly Jesus, six days before the passover, arrived at Bethany, where Lazarus was whom Jesus had raised up from the dead.
2  Therefore they spread an evening meal for him there, and Martha was ministering, but Lazarus was one of those reclining at the table with him.
3  Mary, therefore, took a pound of perfumed oil, genuine nard, very costly, and she greased the feet of Jesus and wiped his feet dry with her hair. The house became filled with the scent of the perfumed oil.
4  But Judas Iscariot, one of his disciples, who was about to betray him, said:
5  “Why was it this perfumed oil was not sold for three hundred denarii and given to the poor people?”
6  He said this, though, not because he was concerned about the poor, but because he was a thief and had the money box and used to carry off the monies put in it.
7  Therefore Jesus said: “Let her alone, that she may keep this observance in view of the day of my burial.
8  For YOU have the poor always with YOU, but me YOU will not have always.”
9  Therefore a great crowd of the Jews got to know he was there, and they came, not on account of Jesus only, but also to see Lazarus, whom he raised up from the dead.
10  The chief priests now took counsel to kill Lazarus also,
11  because on account of him many of the Jews were going there and putting faith in Jesus.
12  The next day the great crowd that had come to the festival, on hearing that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,
13  took the branches of palm trees and went out to meet him. And they began to shout: “Save, we pray you! Blessed is he that comes in Jehovah’s name, even the king of Israel!”
14  But when Jesus had found a young ass, he sat on it, just as it is written:
15  “Have no fear, daughter of Zion. Look! Your king is coming, seated upon an ass’s colt.”
16  These things his disciples took no note of at first, but when Jesus became glorified, then they called to mind that these things were written respecting him and that they did these things to him.
17  Accordingly the crowd that was with him when he called Lazarus out of the memorial tomb and raised him up from the dead kept bearing witness.
18  On this account the crowd, because they heard he had performed this sign, also met him.
19  Therefore the Pharisees said among themselves: “YOU observe YOU are getting absolutely nowhere. See! The world has gone after him.”
20  Now there were some Greeks among those that came up to worship at the festival.
21  These, therefore, approached Philip who was from Bethsaida of Galilee, and they began to request him, saying: “Sir, we want to see Jesus.”
22  Philip came and told Andrew. Andrew and Philip came and told Jesus.
23  But Jesus answered them, saying: “The hour has come for the Son of man to be glorified.
24  Most truly I say to YOU, Unless a grain of wheat falls into the ground and dies, it remains just one [grain];  but if it dies, it then bears much fruit.
25  He that is fond of his soul destroys it, but he that hates his soul in this world will safeguard it for everlasting life.
26  If anyone would minister to me, let him follow me, and where I am there my minister will be also. If anyone would minister to me, the Father will honor him.
27  Now my soul is troubled, and what shall I say? Father, save me out of this hour. Nevertheless, this is why I have come to this hour.
28  Father, glorify your name.” Therefore a voice came out of heaven: “I both glorified [it] and will glorify [it] again.”
29  Hence the crowd that stood about and heard it began to say that it had thundered. Others began to say: “An angel has spoken to him.”
30  In answer Jesus said: “This voice has occurred, not for my sake, but for YOUR sakes.
31  Now there is a judging of this world;  now the ruler of this world will be cast out.
32  And yet I, if I am lifted up from the earth, will draw men of all sorts to me.”
33  This he was really saying to signify what sort of death he was about to die.
34  Therefore the crowd answered him: “We heard from the Law that the Christ remains forever;  and how is it you say that the Son of man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of man?”
35  Jesus therefore said to them: “The light will be among YOU a little while longer. Walk while YOU have the light, so that darkness does not overpower YOU;  and he that walks in the darkness does not know where he is going.
36  While YOU have the light, exercise faith in the light, in order to become sons of light.” Jesus spoke these things and went off and hid from them.
37  But although he had performed so many signs before them, they were not putting faith in him,
38  so that the word of Isaiah the prophet was fulfilled which he said: “Jehovah, who has put faith in the thing heard by us? And as for the arm of Jehovah, to whom has it been revealed?”
39  The reason why they were not able to believe is that again Isaiah said:
40  “He has blinded their eyes and he has made their hearts hard, that they should not see with their eyes and get the thought with their hearts and turn around and I should heal them.”
41  Isaiah said these things because he saw his glory, and he spoke about him.
42  All the same, many even of the rulers actually put faith in him, but because of the Pharisees they would not confess [him], in order not to be expelled from the synagogue; 
43  for they loved the glory of men more than even the glory of God.
44  However, Jesus cried out and said: “He that puts faith in me puts faith, not in me [only], but in him [also] that sent me; 
45  and he that beholds me beholds [also] him that sent me.
46  I have come as a light into the world, in order that everyone putting faith in me may not remain in the darkness.
47  But if anyone hears my sayings and does not keep them, I do not judge him;  for I came, not to judge the world, but to save the world.
48  He that disregards me and does not receive my sayings has one to judge him. The word that I have spoken is what will judge him in the last day; 
49  because I have not spoken out of my own impulse, but the Father himself who sent me has given me a commandment as to what to tell and what to speak.
50  Also, I know that his commandment means everlasting life. Therefore the things I speak, just as the Father has told me [them], so I speak [them].”
john 13
13  Now, because he knew before the festival of the passover that his hour had come for him to move out of this world to the Father, Jesus, having loved his own that were in the world, loved them to the end.
2  So, while the evening meal was going on, the Devil having already put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon, to betray him,
3  he, knowing that the Father had given all things into [his] hands and that he came forth from God and was going to God,
4  got up from the evening meal and laid aside his outer garments. And, taking a towel, he girded himself.
5  After that he put water into a basin and started to wash the feet of the disciples and to dry them off with the towel with which he was girded.
6  And so he came to Simon Peter. He said to him: “Lord, are you washing my feet?”
7  In answer Jesus said to him: “What I am doing you do not understand at present, but you will understand after these things.”
8  Peter said to him: “You will certainly never wash my feet.” Jesus answered him: “Unless I wash you, you have no part with me.”
9  Simon Peter said to him: “Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head.”
10  Jesus said to him: “He that has bathed does not need to have more than his feet washed, but is wholly clean. And YOU men are clean, but not all.”
11  He knew, indeed, the man betraying him. This is why he said: “Not all of YOU are clean.”
12  When, now, he had washed their feet and had put his outer garments on and laid himself down at the table again, he said to them: “Do YOU know what I have done to YOU?
13  YOU address me, ‘Teacher,’ and, ‘Lord,’ and YOU speak rightly, for I am such.
14  Therefore, if I, although Lord and Teacher, washed YOUR feet, YOU also ought to wash the feet of one another.
15  For I set the pattern for YOU, that, just as I did to YOU, YOU should do also.
16  Most truly I say to YOU, A slave is not greater than his master, nor is one that is sent forth greater than the one that sent him.
17  If YOU know these things, happy YOU are if YOU do them.
18  I am not talking about all of YOU;  I know the ones I have chosen. But it is in order that the Scripture might be fulfilled, ‘He that used to feed on my bread has lifted up his heel against me.’
19  From this moment on I am telling YOU before it occurs, in order that when it does occur YOU may believe that I am [he].
20  Most truly I say to YOU, He that receives anyone I send receives me [also]. In turn he that receives me, receives [also] him that sent me.”
21  After saying these things, Jesus became troubled in spirit, and he bore witness and said: “Most truly I say to YOU, One of YOU will betray me.”
22  The disciples began to look at one another, being at a loss as to which one he was saying [it] about.
23  There was reclining in front of Jesus’ bosom one of his disciples, and Jesus loved him.
24  Therefore Simon Peter nodded to this one and said to him: “Tell who it is about whom he is saying [it].”
25  So the latter leaned back upon the breast of Jesus and said to him: “Lord, who is it?”
26  Therefore Jesus answered: “It is that one to whom I shall give the morsel that I dip.” And so, having dipped the morsel, he took and gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot.
27  And after the morsel then Satan entered into the latter. Jesus, therefore, said to him: “What you are doing get done more quickly.”
28  However, none of those reclining at the table knew for what purpose he said this to him.
29  Some, in fact, were imagining, since Judas was holding the money box, that Jesus was telling him: “Buy what things we need for the festival,” or that he should give something to the poor.
30  Therefore, after he received the morsel, he went out immediately. And it was night.
31  Hence when he had gone out, Jesus said: “Now the Son of man is glorified, and God is glorified in connection with him.
32  And God will himself glorify him, and he will glorify him immediately.
33  Little children, I am with YOU a little longer. YOU will look for me;  and just as I said to the Jews, ‘Where I go YOU cannot come,’ I say also to YOU at present.
34  I am giving YOU a new commandment, that YOU love one another;  just as I have loved YOU, that YOU also love one another.
35  By this all will know that YOU are my disciples, if YOU have love among yourselves.”
36  Simon Peter said to him: “Lord, where are you going?” Jesus answered: “Where I am going you cannot follow me now, but you will follow afterwards.”
37  Peter said to him: “Lord, why is it I cannot follow you at present? I will surrender my soul in your behalf.”
38  Jesus answered: “Will you surrender your soul in my behalf? Most truly I say to you, A cock will by no means crow until you have disowned me three times.”
john 14
14  “Do not let YOUR hearts be troubled. Exercise faith in God, exercise faith also in me.
2  In the house of my Father there are many abodes. Otherwise, I would have told YOU, because I am going my way to prepare a place for YOU.
3  Also, if I go my way and prepare a place for YOU, I am coming again and will receive YOU home to myself, that where I am YOU also may be.
4  And where I am going YOU know the way.”
5  Thomas said to him: “Lord, we do not know where you are going. How do we know the way?”
6  Jesus said to him: “I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.
7  If YOU men had known me, YOU would have known my Father also;  from this moment on YOU know him and have seen him.”
8  Philip said to him: “Lord, show us the Father, and it is enough for us.”
9  Jesus said to him: “Have I been with YOU men so long a time, and yet, Philip, you have not come to know me? He that has seen me has seen the Father [also]. How is it you say, ‘Show us the Father’?
10  Do you not believe that I am in union with the Father and the Father is in union with me? The things I say to YOU men I do not speak of my own originality;  but the Father who remains in union with me is doing his works.
11  Believe me that I am in union with the Father and the Father is in union with me;  otherwise, believe on account of the works themselves.
12  Most truly I say to YOU, He that exercises faith in me, that one also will do the works that I do;  and he will do works greater than these, because I am going my way to the Father.
13  Also, whatever it is that YOU ask in my name, I will do this, in order that the Father may be glorified in connection with the Son.
14  If YOU ask anything in my name, I will do it.
15  “If YOU love me, YOU will observe my commandments; 
16  and I will request the Father and he will give YOU another helper to be with YOU forever,
17  the spirit of the truth, which the world cannot receive, because it neither beholds it nor knows it. YOU know it, because it remains with YOU and is in YOU.
18  I shall not leave YOU bereaved. I am coming to YOU.
19  A little longer and the world will behold me no more, but YOU will behold me, because I live and YOU will live.
20  In that day YOU will know that I am in union with my Father and YOU are in union with me and I am in union with YOU.
21  He that has my commandments and observes them, that one is he who loves me. In turn he that loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will plainly show myself to him.”
22  Judas, not Iscariot, said to him: “Lord, what has happened that you intend to show yourself plainly to us and not to the world?”
23  In answer Jesus said to him: “If anyone loves me, he will observe my word, and my Father will love him, and we shall come to him and make our abode with him.
24  He that does not love me does not observe my words;  and the word that YOU are hearing is not mine, but belongs to the Father who sent me.
25  “While remaining with YOU I have spoken these things to YOU.
26  But the helper, the holy spirit, which the Father will send in my name, that one will teach YOU all things and bring back to YOUR minds all the things I told YOU.
27  I leave YOU peace, I give YOU my peace. I do not give it to YOU the way that the world gives it. Do not let YOUR hearts be troubled nor let them shrink for fear.
28  YOU heard that I said to YOU, I am going away and I am coming [back] to YOU. If YOU loved me, YOU would rejoice that I am going my way to the Father, because the Father is greater than I am.
29  So now I have told YOU before it occurs, in order that, when it does occur, YOU may believe.
30  I shall not speak much with YOU anymore, for the ruler of the world is coming. And he has no hold on me,
31  but, in order for the world to know that I love the Father, even as the Father has given me commandment [to do], so I am doing. Get up, let us go from here.
john 15
15  “I am the true vine, and my Father is the cultivator.
2  Every branch in me not bearing fruit he takes away, and every one bearing fruit he cleans, that it may bear more fruit.
3  YOU are already clean because of the word that I have spoken to YOU.
4  Remain in union with me, and I in union with YOU. Just as the branch cannot bear fruit of itself unless it remains in the vine, in the same way neither can YOU, unless YOU remain in union with me.
5  I am the vine, YOU are the branches. He that remains in union with me, and I in union with him, this one bears much fruit;  because apart from me YOU can do nothing at all.
6  If anyone does not remain in union with me, he is cast out as a branch and is dried up;  and men gather those branches up and pitch them into the fire and they are burned.
7  If YOU remain in union with me and my sayings remain in YOU, ask whatever YOU wish and it will take place for YOU.
8  My Father is glorified in this, that YOU keep bearing much fruit and prove yourselves my disciples.
9  Just as the Father has loved me and I have loved YOU, remain in my love.
10  If YOU observe my commandments, YOU will remain in my love, just as I have observed the commandments of the Father and remain in his love.
11  “These things I have spoken to YOU, that my joy may be in YOU and YOUR joy may be made full.
12  This is my commandment, that YOU love one another just as I have loved YOU.
13  No one has love greater than this, that someone should surrender his soul in behalf of his friends.
14  YOU are my friends if YOU do what I am commanding YOU.
15  I no longer call YOU slaves, because a slave does not know what his master does. But I have called YOU friends, because all the things I have heard from my Father I have made known to YOU.
16  YOU did not choose me, but I chose YOU, and I appointed YOU to go on and keep bearing fruit and that YOUR fruit should remain;  in order that no matter what YOU ask the Father in my name he might give it to YOU.
17  “These things I command YOU, that YOU love one another.
18  If the world hates YOU, YOU know that it has hated me before it hated YOU.
19  If YOU were part of the world, the world would be fond of what is its own. Now because YOU are no part of the world, but I have chosen YOU out of the world, on this account the world hates YOU.
20  Bear in mind the word I said to YOU, A slave is not greater than his master. If they have persecuted me, they will persecute YOU also;  if they have observed my word, they will observe YOURS also.
21  But they will do all these things against YOU on account of my name, because they do not know him that sent me.
22  If I had not come and spoken to them, they would have no sin;  but now they have no excuse for their sin.
23  He that hates me hates also my Father.
24  If I had not done among them the works that no one else did, they would have no sin;  but now they have both seen and hated me as well as my Father.
25  But it is that the word written in their Law may be fulfilled, ‘They hated me without cause.’
26  When the helper arrives that I will send YOU from the Father, the spirit of the truth, which proceeds from the Father, that one will bear witness about me; 
27  and YOU, in turn, are to bear witness, because YOU have been with me from when I began.
john 16
16  “I have spoken these things to YOU that YOU may not be stumbled.
2  Men will expel YOU from the synagogue. In fact, the hour is coming when everyone that kills YOU will imagine he has rendered a sacred service to God.
3  But they will do these things because they have not come to know either the Father or me.
4  Nevertheless, I have spoken these things to YOU that, when the hour for them arrives, YOU may remember I told them to YOU. “These things, however, I did not tell YOU at first, because I was with YOU.
5  But now I am going to him that sent me, and yet not one of YOU asks me, ‘Where are you going?’
6  But because I have spoken these things to YOU grief has filled YOUR hearts.
7  Nevertheless, I am telling YOU the truth, It is for YOUR benefit I am going away. For if I do not go away, the helper will by no means come to YOU;  but if I do go my way, I will send him to YOU.
8  And when that one arrives he will give the world convincing evidence concerning sin and concerning righteousness and concerning judgment:
9  in the first place, concerning sin, because they are not exercising faith in me; 
10  then concerning righteousness, because I am going to the Father and YOU will behold me no longer; 
11  then concerning judgment, because the ruler of this world has been judged.
12  “I have many things yet to say to YOU, but YOU are not able to bear them at present.
13  However, when that one arrives, the spirit of the truth, he will guide YOU into all the truth, for he will not speak of his own impulse, but what things he hears he will speak, and he will declare to YOU the things coming.
14  That one will glorify me, because he will receive from what is mine and will declare it to YOU.
15  All the things that the Father has are mine. That is why I said he receives from what is mine and declares [it] to YOU.
16  In a little while YOU will behold me no longer, and, again, in a little while YOU will see me.”
17  Therefore some of his disciples said to one another: “What does this mean that he says to us, ‘In a little while YOU will not behold me, and, again, in a little while YOU will see me,’ and, ‘because I am going to the Father’?”
18  Hence they were saying: “What does this mean that he says, ‘a little while’? We do not know what he is talking about.”
19  Jesus knew they were wanting to question him, so he said to them: “Are YOU inquiring among yourselves over this, because I said, In a little while YOU will not behold me, and, again, in a little while YOU will see me?
20  Most truly I say to YOU, YOU will weep and wail, but the world will rejoice;  YOU will be grieved, but YOUR grief will be turned into joy.
21  A woman, when she is giving birth, has grief, because her hour has arrived;  but when she has brought forth the young child, she remembers the tribulation no more because of the joy that a man has been born into the world.
22  YOU also, therefore, are now, indeed, having grief;  but I shall see YOU again and YOUR hearts will rejoice, and YOUR joy no one will take from YOU.
23  And in that day YOU will ask me no question at all. Most truly I say to YOU, If YOU ask the Father for anything he will give it to YOU in my name.
24  Until this present time YOU have not asked a single thing in my name. Ask and YOU will receive, that YOUR joy may be made full.
25  “I have spoken these things to YOU in comparisons. The hour is coming when I will speak to YOU no more in comparisons, but I will report to YOU with plainness concerning the Father.
26  In that day YOU will ask in my name, and I do not say to YOU that I shall make request of the Father concerning YOU.
27  For the Father himself has affection for YOU, because YOU have had affection for me and have believed that I came out as the Father’s representative.
28  I came out from the Father and have come into the world. Further, I am leaving the world and am going my way to the Father.”
29  His disciples said: “See! Now you are speaking with plainness, and are uttering no comparison.
30  Now we know that you know all things and you do not need to have anyone question you. By this we believe that you came out from God.”
31  Jesus answered them: “Do YOU believe at present?
32  Look! The hour is coming, indeed, it has come, when YOU will be scattered each one to his own house and YOU will leave me alone;  and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.
33  I have said these things to YOU that by means of me YOU may have peace. In the world YOU are having tribulation, but take courage! I have conquered the world.”
john 17
17  Jesus spoke these things, and, raising his eyes to heaven, he said: “Father, the hour has come;  glorify your son, that your son may glorify you,
2  according as you have given him authority over all flesh, that, as regards the whole [number] whom you have given him, he may give them everlasting life.
3  This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.
4  I have glorified you on the earth, having finished the work you have given me to do.
5  So now you, Father, glorify me alongside yourself with the glory that I had alongside you before the world was.
6  “I have made your name manifest to the men you gave me out of the world. They were yours, and you gave them to me, and they have observed your word.
7  They have now come to know that all the things you gave me are from you; 
8  because the sayings that you gave me I have given to them, and they have received them and have certainly come to know that I came out as your representative, and they have believed that you sent me forth.
9  I make request concerning them;  I make request, not concerning the world, but concerning those you have given me;  because they are yours,
10  and all my things are yours and yours are mine, and I have been glorified among them.
11  “Also, I am no longer in the world, but they are in the world and I am coming to you. Holy Father, watch over them on account of your own name which you have given me, in order that they may be one just as we are.
12  When I was with them I used to watch over them on account of your own name which you have given me;  and I have kept them, and not one of them is destroyed except the son of destruction, in order that the scripture might be fulfilled.
13  But now I am coming to you, and I am speaking these things in the world in order that they may have my joy in themselves to the full.
14  I have given your word to them, but the world has hated them, because they are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the world.
15  “I request you, not to take them out of the world, but to watch over them because of the wicked one.
16  They are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the world.
17  Sanctify them by means of the truth;  your word is truth.
18  Just as you sent me forth into the world, I also sent them forth into the world.
19  And I am sanctifying myself in their behalf, that they also may be sanctified by means of truth.
20  “I make request, not concerning these only, but also concerning those putting faith in me through their word; 
21  in order that they may all be one, just as you, Father, are in union with me and I am in union with you, that they also may be in union with us, in order that the world may believe that you sent me forth.
22  Also, I have given them the glory that you have given me, in order that they may be one just as we are one.
23  I in union with them and you in union with me, in order that they may be perfected into one, that the world may have the knowledge that you sent me forth and that you loved them just as you loved me.
24  Father, as to what you have given me, I wish that, where I am, they also may be with me, in order to behold my glory that you have given me, because you loved me before the founding of the world.
25  Righteous Father, the world has, indeed, not come to know you;  but I have come to know you, and these have come to know that you sent me forth.
26  And I have made your name known to them and will make it known, in order that the love with which you loved me may be in them and I in union with them.”
john 18
18  Having said these things, Jesus went out with his disciples across the winter torrent of Kidron to where there was a garden, and he and his disciples entered into it.
2  Now Judas, his betrayer, also knew the place, because Jesus had many times met there with his disciples.
3  Therefore Judas took the soldier band and officers of the chief priests and of the Pharisees and came there with torches and lamps and weapons.
4  Jesus, therefore, knowing all the things coming upon him, went forth and said to them: “Whom are YOU looking for?”
5  They answered him: “Jesus the Nazarene.” He said to them: “I am [he].” Now Judas, his betrayer, was also standing with them.
6  However, when he said to them: “I am [he],” they drew back and fell to the ground.
7  Therefore he asked them again: “Whom are YOU looking for?” They said: “Jesus the Nazarene.”
8  Jesus answered: “I told YOU I am [he]. If, therefore, it is I YOU are looking for, let these go”; 
9  in order that the word might be fulfilled which he said: “Of those whom you have given me I have not lost a single one.”
10  Then Simon Peter, as he had a sword, drew it and struck the slave of the high priest and cut his right ear off. The name of the slave was Malchus.
11  Jesus, however, said to Peter: “Put the sword into [its] sheath. The cup that the Father has given me, should I not by all means drink it?”
12  Then the soldier band and the military commander and the officers of the Jews seized Jesus and bound him,
13  and they led him first to Annas;  for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was high priest that year.
14  Caiaphas was, in fact, the one that counseled the Jews that it was to their benefit for one man to die in behalf of the people.
15  Now Simon Peter as well as another disciple was following Jesus. That disciple was known to the high priest, and he went in with Jesus into the courtyard of the high priest,
16  but Peter was standing outside at the door. Therefore the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the doorkeeper and brought Peter in.
17  The servant girl, the doorkeeper, then said to Peter: “You are not also one of this man’s disciples, are you?” He said: “I am not.”
18  Now the slaves and the officers were standing about, as they had built a charcoal fire, because it was cold, and they were warming themselves. Peter also was standing with them and warming himself.
19  And so the chief priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and about his teaching.
20  Jesus answered him: “I have spoken to the world publicly. I always taught in a synagogue and in the temple, where all the Jews come together;  and I spoke nothing in secret.
21  Why do you question me? Question those who have heard what I spoke to them. See! These know what I said.”
22  After he said these things, one of the officers that was standing by gave Jesus a slap in the face and said: “Is that the way you answer the chief priest?”
23  Jesus answered him: “If I spoke wrongly, bear witness concerning the wrong;  but if rightly, why do you hit me?”
24  Then Annas sent him away bound to Caiaphas the high priest.
25  Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. Then they said to him: “You are not also one of his disciples, are you?” He denied it and said: “I am not.”
26  One of the slaves of the high priest, being a relative of the man whose ear Peter cut off, said: “I saw you in the garden with him, did I not?”
27  However, Peter denied it again;  and immediately a cock crowed.
28  Then they led Jesus from Caiaphas to the governor’s palace. It was now early in the day. But they themselves did not enter into the governor’s palace, that they might not get defiled but might eat the passover.
29  Therefore Pilate came outside to them and said: “What accusation do YOU bring against this man?”
30  In answer they said to him: “If this man were not a wrongdoer, we would not have delivered him up to you.”
31  Hence Pilate said to them: “Take him yourselves and judge him according to YOUR law.” The Jews said to him: “It is not lawful for us to kill anyone.”
32  This, in order that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled which he said to signify what sort of death he was destined to die.
33  So Pilate entered into the governor’s palace again and called Jesus and said to him: “Are you the king of the Jews?”
34  Jesus answered: “Is it of your own originality that you say this, or did others tell you about me?”
35  Pilate answered: “I am not a Jew, am I? Your own nation and the chief priests delivered you up to me. What did you do?”
36  Jesus answered: “My kingdom is no part of this world. If my kingdom were part of this world, my attendants would have fought that I should not be delivered up to the Jews. But, as it is, my kingdom is not from this source.”
37  Therefore Pilate said to him: “Well, then, are you a king?” Jesus answered: “You yourself are saying that I am a king. For this I have been born, and for this I have come into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth. Everyone that is on the side of the truth listens to my voice.”
38  Pilate said to him: “What is truth?” And after saying this, he went out again to the Jews and said to them: “I find no fault in him.
39  Moreover, YOU have a custom that I should release a man to YOU at the passover. Do YOU, therefore, wish me to release to YOU the king of the Jews?”
40  Then they shouted again, saying: “Not this man, but Barabbas!” Now Barabbas was a robber.
john 19
19  At that time, therefore, Pilate took Jesus and scourged him.
2  And the soldiers braided a crown of thorns and put it on his head and arrayed him with a purple outer garment; 
3  and they began coming up to him and saying: “Good day, you King of the Jews!” Also, they would give him slaps in the face.
4  And Pilate went outside again and said to them: “See! I bring him outside to YOU in order for YOU to know I find no fault in him.”
5  Accordingly Jesus came outside, wearing the thorny crown and the purple outer garment. And he said to them: “Look! The man!”
6  However, when the chief priests and the officers saw him, they shouted, saying: “Impale [him]! Impale [him]!” Pilate said to them: “Take him yourselves and impale him, for I do not find any fault in him.”
7  The Jews answered him: “We have a law, and according to the law he ought to die, because he made himself God’s son.”
8  When, therefore, Pilate heard this saying, he became more fearful; 
9  and he entered into the governor’s palace again and said to Jesus: “Where are you from?” But Jesus gave him no answer.
10  Hence Pilate said to him: “Are you not speaking to me? Do you not know I have authority to release you and I have authority to impale you?”
11  Jesus answered him: “You would have no authority at all against me unless it had been granted to you from above. This is why the man that handed me over to you has greater sin.”
12  For this reason Pilate kept on seeking how to release him. But the Jews shouted, saying: “If you release this [man], you are not a friend of Caesar. Every man making himself a king speaks against Caesar.”
13  Therefore Pilate, after hearing these words, brought Jesus outside, and he sat down on a judgment seat in a place called The Stone Pavement, but, in Hebrew, Gabbatha.
14  Now it was preparation of the passover;  it was about the sixth hour. And he said to the Jews: “See! YOUR king!”
15  However, they shouted: “Take [him] away! Take [him] away! Impale him!” Pilate said to them: “Shall I impale YOUR king?” The chief priests answered: “We have no king but Caesar.”
16  At that time, therefore, he handed him over to them to be impaled. Then they took charge of Jesus.
17  And, bearing the torture stake for himself, he went out to the so-called Skull Place, which is called Golgotha in Hebrew; 
18  and there they impaled him, and two other [men] with him, one on this side and one on that, but Jesus in the middle.
19  Pilate wrote a title also and put it on the torture stake. It was written: “Jesus the Nazarene the King of the Jews.”
20  Therefore many of the Jews read this title, because the place where Jesus was impaled was near the city;  and it was written in Hebrew, in Latin, in Greek.
21  However, the chief priests of the Jews began to say to Pilate: “Do not write ‘The King of the Jews,’ but that he said, ‘I am King of the Jews.’”
22  Pilate answered: “What I have written I have written.”
23  Now when the soldiers had impaled Jesus, they took his outer garments and made four parts, for each soldier a part, and the inner garment. But the inner garment was without a seam, being woven from the top throughout its length.
24  Therefore they said to one another: “Let us not tear it, but let us determine by lots over it whose it will be.” This was that the scripture might be fulfilled: “They apportioned my outer garments among themselves, and upon my apparel they cast lots.” And so the soldiers really did these things.
25  By the torture stake of Jesus, however, there were standing his mother and the sister of his mother;  Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene.
26  Therefore Jesus, seeing his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing by, said to his mother: “Woman, see! Your son!”
27  Next he said to the disciple: “See! Your mother!” And from that hour on the disciple took her to his own home.
28  After this, when Jesus knew that by now all things had been accomplished, in order that the scripture might be accomplished he said: “I am thirsty.”
29  A vessel was sitting there full of sour wine. Therefore they put a sponge full of the sour wine upon a hyssop [stalk] and brought it to his mouth.
30  When, now, he had received the sour wine, Jesus said: “It has been accomplished!” and, bowing his head, he delivered up [his] spirit.
31  Then the Jews, since it was Preparation, in order that the bodies might not remain upon the torture stakes on the Sabbath, (for the day of that Sabbath was a great one,) requested Pilate to have their legs broken and the [bodies] taken away.
32  The soldiers came, therefore, and broke the legs of the first [man] and those of the other [man] that had been impaled with him.
33  But on coming to Jesus, as they saw that he was already dead, they did not break his legs.
34  Yet one of the soldiers jabbed his side with a spear, and immediately blood and water came out.
35  And he that has seen [it] has borne witness, and his witness is true, and that man knows he tells true things, in order that YOU also may believe.
36  In fact, these things took place in order for the scripture to be fulfilled: “Not a bone of his will be crushed.”
37  And, again, a different scripture says: “They will look to the One whom they pierced.”
38  Now after these things Joseph from Arimathea, who was a disciple of Jesus but a secret one out of [his] fear of the Jews, requested Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus;  and Pilate gave him permission. Therefore he came and took his body away.
39  Nicodemus also, the man that came to him in the night the first time, came bringing a roll of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred pounds [of it].
40  So they took the body of Jesus and bound it up with bandages with the spices, just the way the Jews have the custom of preparing for burial.
41  Incidentally, at the place where he was impaled there was a garden, and in the garden a new memorial tomb, in which no one had ever yet been laid.
42  There, then, on account of the preparation of the Jews, they laid Jesus, because the memorial tomb was nearby.
john 20
20  On the first day of the week Mary Magdalene came to the memorial tomb early, while there was still darkness, and she beheld the stone already taken away from the memorial tomb.
2  Therefore she ran and came to Simon Peter and to the other disciple, for whom Jesus had affection, and she said to them: “They have taken away the Lord out of the memorial tomb, and we do not know where they have laid him.”
3  Then Peter and the other disciple went out and started for the memorial tomb.
4  Yes, the two together began to run;  but the other disciple ran ahead of Peter with greater speed and reached the memorial tomb first.
5  And, stooping forward, he beheld the bandages lying, yet he did not go in.
6  Then Simon Peter also came following him, and he entered into the memorial tomb. And he viewed the bandages lying,
7  also the cloth that had been upon his head not lying with the bandages but separately rolled up in one place.
8  At that time, therefore, the other disciple who had reached the memorial tomb first also went in, and he saw and believed.
9  For they did not yet discern the scripture that he must rise from the dead.
10  And so the disciples went back to their homes.
11  Mary, however, kept standing outside near the memorial tomb, weeping. Then, while she was weeping, she stooped forward to look into the memorial tomb
12  and she viewed two angels in white sitting one at the head and one at the feet where the body of Jesus had been lying.
13  And they said to her: “Woman, why are you weeping?” She said to them: “They have taken my Lord away, and I do not know where they have laid him.”
14  After saying these things, she turned back and viewed Jesus standing, but she did not discern it was Jesus.
15  Jesus said to her: “Woman, why are you weeping? Whom are you looking for?” She, imagining it was the gardener, said to him: “Sir, if you have carried him off, tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him away.”
16  Jesus said to her: “Mary!” Upon turning around, she said to him, in Hebrew: “Rabboni!” (which means “Teacher!”)
17  Jesus said to her: “Stop clinging to me. For I have not yet ascended to the Father. But be on your way to my brothers and say to them, ‘I am ascending to my Father and YOUR Father and to my God and YOUR God.’”
18  Mary Magdalene came and brought the news to the disciples: “I have seen the Lord!” and that he said these things to her.
19  Therefore, when it was late on that day, the first of the week, and, although the doors were locked where the disciples were for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in their midst and said to them: “May YOU have peace.”
20  And after he said this he showed them both his hands and his side. Then the disciples rejoiced at seeing the Lord.
21  Jesus, therefore, said to them again: “May YOU have peace. Just as the Father has sent me forth, I also am sending YOU.”
22  And after he said this he blew upon them and said to them: “Receive holy spirit.
23  If YOU forgive the sins of any persons, they stand forgiven to them;  if YOU retain those of any persons, they stand retained.”
24  But Thomas, one of the twelve, who was called The Twin, was not with them when Jesus came.
25  Consequently the other disciples would say to him: “We have seen the Lord!” But he said to them: “Unless I see in his hands the print of the nails and stick my finger into the print of the nails and stick my hand into his side, I will certainly not believe.”
26  Well, eight days later his disciples were again indoors, and Thomas with them. Jesus came, although the doors were locked, and he stood in their midst and said: “May YOU have peace.”
27  Next he said to Thomas: “Put your finger here, and see my hands, and take your hand and stick it into my side, and stop being unbelieving but become believing.”
28  In answer Thomas said to him: “My Lord and my God!”
29  Jesus said to him: “Because you have seen me have you believed? Happy are those who do not see and yet believe.”
30  To be sure, Jesus performed many other signs also before the disciples, which are not written down in this scroll.
31  But these have been written down that YOU may believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that, because of believing, YOU may have life by means of his name.
john 21
21  After these things Jesus manifested himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias;  but he made the manifestation in this way.
2  There were in company Simon Peter and Thomas, who was called The Twin, and Nathanael from Cana of Galilee and the sons of Zebedee and two others of his disciples.
3  Simon Peter said to them: “I am going fishing.” They said to him: “We also are coming with you.” Out they went and got aboard the boat, but during that night they caught nothing.
4  However, just as it was getting to be morning, Jesus stood on the beach, but the disciples did not, of course, discern that it was Jesus.
5  Then Jesus said to them: “Young children, YOU do not have anything to eat, do YOU?” They answered “No!” to him.
6  He said to them: “Cast the net on the right side of the boat and YOU will find [some].” Then they cast it, but they were no longer able to draw it in because of the multitude of the fishes.
7  Therefore that disciple whom Jesus used to love said to Peter: “It is the Lord!” Hence Simon Peter, upon hearing that it was the Lord, girded about himself his top garment, for he was naked, and plunged into the sea.
8  But the other disciples came in the little boat, for they were not a long way from land, only about three hundred feet away, dragging the net of fishes.
9  However, when they disembarked onto land they beheld lying there a charcoal fire and fish lying upon it and bread.
10  Jesus said to them: “Bring some of the fish YOU just now caught.”
11  Simon Peter, therefore, went on board and drew the net to land full of big fishes, one hundred and fifty-three of them. But although there were so many the net did not burst.
12  Jesus said to them: “Come, take YOUR breakfast.” Not one of the disciples had the courage to inquire of him: “Who are you?” because they knew it was the Lord.
13  Jesus came and took the bread and gave it to them, and the fish likewise.
14  This was now the third time that Jesus appeared to the disciples after his being raised up from the dead.
15  When, now, they had breakfasted, Jesus said to Simon Peter: “Simon son of John, do you love me more than these?” He said to him: “Yes, Lord, you know I have affection for you.” He said to him: “Feed my lambs.”
16  Again he said to him, a second time: “Simon son of John, do you love me?” He said to him: “Yes, Lord, you know I have affection for you.” He said to him: “Shepherd my little sheep.”
17  He said to him the third time: “Simon son of John, do you have affection for me?” Peter became grieved that he said to him the third time: “Do you have affection for me?” So he said to him: “Lord, you know all things;  you are aware that I have affection for you.” Jesus said to him: “Feed my little sheep.
18  Most truly I say to you, When you were younger, you used to gird yourself and walk about where you wanted. But when you grow old you will stretch out your hands and another [man] will gird you and bear you where you do not wish.”
19  This he said to signify by what sort of death he would glorify God. So, when he had said this, he said to him: “Continue following me.”
20  Upon turning about Peter saw the disciple whom Jesus used to love following, the one who at the evening meal had also leaned back upon his breast and said: “Lord, who is the one betraying you?”
21  Accordingly, when he caught sight of him, Peter said to Jesus: “Lord, what will this [man do]?”
22  Jesus said to him: “If it is my will for him to remain until I come, of what concern is that to you? You continue following me.”
23  In consequence, this saying went out among the brothers, that that disciple would not die. However, Jesus did not say to him that he would not die, but: “If it is my will for him to remain until I come, of what concern is that to you?”
24  This is the disciple that bears witness about these things and that wrote these things, and we know that the witness he gives is true.
25  There are, in fact, many other things also which Jesus did, which, if ever they were written in full detail, I suppose, the world itself could not contain the scrolls written.
acts 1
1  The first account, O Theophilus, I composed about all the things Jesus started both to do and to teach,
2  until the day that he was taken up, after he had given commandment through holy spirit to the apostles whom he chose.
3  To these also by many positive proofs he showed himself alive after he had suffered, being seen by them throughout forty days and telling the things about the kingdom of God.
4  And while he was meeting with them he gave them the orders: “Do not withdraw from Jerusalem, but keep waiting for what the Father has promised, about which YOU heard from me; 
5  because John, indeed, baptized with water, but YOU will be baptized in holy spirit not many days after this.”
6  When, now, they had assembled, they went asking him: “Lord, are you restoring the kingdom to Israel at this time?”
7  He said to them: “It does not belong to YOU to get knowledge of the times or seasons which the Father has placed in his own jurisdiction; 
8  but YOU will receive power when the holy spirit arrives upon YOU, and YOU will be witnesses of me both in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria and to the most distant part of the earth.”
9  And after he had said these things, while they were looking on, he was lifted up and a cloud caught him up from their vision.
10  And as they were gazing into the sky while he was on his way, also, look! two men in white garments stood alongside them,
11  and they said: “Men of Galilee, why do YOU stand looking into the sky? This Jesus who was received up from YOU into the sky will come thus in the same manner as YOU have beheld him going into the sky.”
12  Then they returned to Jerusalem from a mountain called the Mount of Olives, which is near Jerusalem, being a sabbath day’s journey away.
13  So, when they had entered, they went up into the upper chamber, where they were staying, Peter as well as John and James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James [the son] of Alphaeus and Simon the zealous one, and Judas [the son] of James.
14  With one accord all these were persisting in prayer, together with some women and Mary the mother of Jesus and with his brothers.
15  Now during these days Peter rose up in the midst of the brothers and said (the crowd of persons was all together about one hundred and twenty):
16  “Men, brothers, it was necessary for the scripture to be fulfilled, which the holy spirit spoke beforehand by David’s mouth about Judas, who became a guide to those who arrested Jesus,
17  because he had been numbered among us and he obtained a share in this ministry.
18  (This very man, therefore, purchased a field with the wages for unrighteousness, and pitching head foremost he noisily burst in his midst and all his intestines were poured out.
19  It also became known to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that that field was called in their language Akeldama, that is, Field of Blood.)
20  For it is written in the book of Psalms, ‘Let his lodging place become desolate, and let there be no dweller in it,’ and, ‘His office of oversight let someone else take.’
21  It is therefore necessary that of the men that assembled with us during all the time in which the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,
22  starting with his baptism by John and until the day he was received up from us, one of these men should become a witness with us of his resurrection.”
23  So they put up two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias.
24  And they prayed and said: “You, O Jehovah, who know the hearts of all, designate which one of these two men you have chosen,
25  to take the place of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas deviated to go to his own place.”
26  So they cast lots over them, and the lot fell upon Matthias;  and he was reckoned along with the eleven apostles.
acts 2
2  Now while the day of the [festival of] Pentecost was in progress they were all together at the same place,
2  and suddenly there occurred from heaven a noise just like that of a rushing stiff breeze, and it filled the whole house in which they were sitting.
3  And tongues as if of fire became visible to them and were distributed about, and one sat upon each one of them,
4  and they all became filled with holy spirit and started to speak with different tongues, just as the spirit was granting them to make utterance.
5  As it was, there were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews, reverent men, from every nation of those under heaven.
6  So, when this sound occurred, the multitude came together and were bewildered, because each one heard them speaking in his own language.
7  Indeed, they were astonished and began to wonder and say: “See here, all these who are speaking are Galileans, are they not?
8  And yet how is it we are hearing, each one of us, his own language in which we were born?
9  Parthians and Medes and Elamites, and the inhabitants of Mesopotamia, and Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and the [district of] Asia,
10  and Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya, which is toward Cyrene, and sojourners from Rome, both Jews and proselytes,
11  Cretans and Arabians, we hear them speaking in our tongues about the magnificent things of God.”
12  Yes, they were all astonished and were in perplexity, saying one to another: “What does this thing purport to be?”
13  However, different ones mocked at them and began to say: “They are full of sweet wine.”
14  But Peter stood up with the eleven and raised his voice and made this utterance to them: “Men of Judea and all YOU inhabitants of Jerusalem, let this be known to YOU and give ear to my sayings.
15  These [people] are, in fact, not drunk, as YOU suppose, for it is the third hour of the day.
16  On the contrary, this is what was said through the prophet Joel,
17  ‘“And in the last days,” God says, “I shall pour out some of my spirit upon every sort of flesh, and YOUR sons and YOUR daughters will prophesy and YOUR young men will see visions and YOUR old men will dream dreams; 
18  and even upon my men slaves and upon my women slaves I will pour out some of my spirit in those days, and they will prophesy.
19  And I will give portents in heaven above and signs on earth below, blood and fire and smoke mist; 
20  the sun will be turned into darkness and the moon into blood before the great and illustrious day of Jehovah arrives.
21  And everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved.”’
22  “Men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus the Nazarene, a man publicly shown by God to YOU through powerful works and portents and signs that God did through him in YOUR midst, just as YOU yourselves know,
23  this [man], as one delivered up by the determined counsel and foreknowledge of God, YOU fastened to a stake by the hand of lawless men and did away with.
24  But God resurrected him by loosing the pangs of death, because it was not possible for him to continue to be held fast by it.
25  For David says respecting him, ‘I had Jehovah constantly before my eyes;  because he is at my right hand that I may never be shaken.
26  On this account my heart became cheerful and my tongue rejoiced greatly. Moreover, even my flesh will reside in hope; 
27  because you will not leave my soul in Hades, neither will you allow your loyal one to see corruption.
28  You have made life’s ways known to me, you will fill me with good cheer with your face.’
29  “Men, brothers, it is allowable to speak with freeness of speech to YOU concerning the family head David, that he both deceased and was buried and his tomb is among us to this day.
30  Therefore, because he was a prophet and knew that God had sworn to him with an oath that he would seat one from the fruitage of his loins upon his throne,
31  he saw beforehand and spoke concerning the resurrection of the Christ, that neither was he forsaken in Hades nor did his flesh see corruption.
32  This Jesus God resurrected, of which fact we are all witnesses.
33  Therefore because he was exalted to the right hand of God and received the promised holy spirit from the Father, he has poured out this which YOU see and hear.
34  Actually David did not ascend to the heavens, but he himself says, ‘Jehovah said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand,
35  until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet.”’
36  Therefore let all the house of Israel know for a certainty that God made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom YOU impaled.”
37  Now when they heard this they were stabbed to the heart, and they said to Peter and the rest of the apostles: “Men, brothers, what shall we do?”
38  Peter [said] to them: “Repent, and let each one of YOU be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for forgiveness of YOUR sins, and YOU will receive the free gift of the holy spirit.
39  For the promise is to YOU and to YOUR children and to all those afar off, just as many as Jehovah our God may call to him.”
40  And with many other words he bore thorough witness and kept exhorting them, saying: “Get saved from this crooked generation.”
41  Therefore those who embraced his word heartily were baptized, and on that day about three thousand souls were added.
42  And they continued devoting themselves to the teaching of the apostles and to sharing [with one another], to taking of meals and to prayers.
43  Indeed, fear began to fall upon every soul, and many portents and signs began to occur through the apostles.
44  All those who became believers were together in having all things in common,
45  and they went selling their possessions and properties and distributing the [proceeds] to all, just as anyone would have the need.
46  And day after day they were in constant attendance at the temple with one accord, and they took their meals in private homes and partook of food with great rejoicing and sincerity of heart,
47  praising God and finding favor with all the people. At the same time Jehovah continued to join to them daily those being saved.
acts 3
3  Now Peter and John were going up into the temple for the hour of prayer, the ninth hour,
2  and a certain man that was lame from his mother’s womb was being carried, and they would daily put him near the temple door that was called Beautiful, in order to ask gifts of mercy from those entering into the temple.
3  When he caught sight of Peter and John about to go into the temple he began requesting to get gifts of mercy.
4  But Peter, together with John, gazed at him and said: “Take a look at us.”
5  So he fixed his attention upon them, expecting to get something from them.
6  However, Peter said: “Silver and gold I do not possess, but what I do have is what I give you: In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, walk!”
7  With that he took hold of him by the right hand and raised him up. Instantly the soles of his feet and his anklebones were made firm; 
8  and, leaping up, he stood up and began walking, and he entered with them into the temple, walking and leaping and praising God.
9  And all the people got sight of him walking and praising God.
10  Moreover, they began to recognize him, that this was the man that used to sit for gifts of mercy at the Beautiful Gate of the temple, and they became filled with astonishment and ecstasy at what had happened to him.
11  Well, as the man was holding onto Peter and John, all the people ran together to them at what was called Solomon’s colonnade, surprised out of their wits.
12  When Peter saw this, he said to the people: “Men of Israel, why are YOU wondering over this, or why are YOU gazing at us as though by personal power or godly devotion we have made him walk?
13  The God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob, the God of our forefathers, has glorified his Servant, Jesus, whom YOU, for YOUR part, delivered up and disowned before Pilate’s face, when he had decided to release him.
14  Yes, YOU disowned that holy and righteous one, and YOU asked for a man, a murderer, to be freely granted to YOU,
15  whereas YOU killed the Chief Agent of life. But God raised him up from the dead, of which fact we are witnesses.
16  Consequently his name, by [our] faith in his name, has made this man strong whom YOU behold and know, and the faith that is through him has given the man this complete soundness in the sight of all of YOU.
17  And now, brothers, I know that YOU acted in ignorance, just as YOUR rulers also did.
18  But in this way God has fulfilled the things he announced beforehand through the mouth of all the prophets, that his Christ would suffer.
19  “Repent, therefore, and turn around so as to get YOUR sins blotted out, that seasons of refreshing may come from the person of Jehovah
20  and that he may send forth the Christ appointed for YOU, Jesus,
21  whom heaven, indeed, must hold within itself until the times of restoration of all things of which God spoke through the mouth of his holy prophets of old time.
22  In fact, Moses said, ‘Jehovah God will raise up for YOU from among YOUR brothers a prophet like me. YOU must listen to him according to all the things he speaks to YOU.
23  Indeed, any soul that does not listen to that Prophet will be completely destroyed from among the people.’
24  And all the prophets, in fact, from Samuel on and those in succession, just as many as have spoken, have also plainly declared these days.
25  YOU are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant which God covenanted with YOUR forefathers, saying to Abraham, ‘And in your seed all the families of the earth will be blessed.’
26  To YOU first God, after raising up his Servant, sent him forth to bless YOU by turning each one away from YOUR wicked deeds.”
acts 4
4  Now while the [two] were speaking to the people, the chief priests and the captain of the temple and the Sadducees came upon them,
2  being annoyed because they were teaching the people and were plainly declaring the resurrection from the dead in the case of Jesus; 
3  and they laid their hands upon them and put them in custody till the next day, for it was already evening.
4  However, many of those who had listened to the speech believed, and the number of the men became about five thousand.
5  The next day there took place in Jerusalem the gathering together of their rulers and older men and scribes
6  (also Annas the chief priest and Caiaphas and John and Alexander and as many as were of the chief priest’s kinsfolk),
7  and they stood them in their midst and began to inquire: “By what power or in whose name did YOU do this?”
8  Then Peter, filled with holy spirit, said to them: “Rulers of the people and older men,
9  if we are this day being examined, on the basis of a good deed to an ailing man, as to by whom this man has been made well,
10  let it be known to all of YOU and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, whom YOU impaled but whom God raised up from the dead, by this one does this man stand here sound in front of YOU.
11  This is ‘the stone that was treated by YOU builders as of no account that has become the head of the corner.’
12  Furthermore, there is no salvation in anyone else, for there is not another name under heaven that has been given among men by which we must get saved.”
13  Now when they beheld the outspokenness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were men unlettered and ordinary, they got to wondering. And they began to recognize about them that they used to be with Jesus; 
14  and as they were looking at the man that had been cured standing with them, they had nothing to say in rebuttal.
15  So they commanded them to go outside the Sanhedrin hall, and they began consulting with one another,
16  saying: “What shall we do with these men? Because, for a fact, a noteworthy sign has occurred through them, one manifest to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem;  and we cannot deny it.
17  Nevertheless, in order that it may not be spread abroad further among the people, let us tell them with threats not to speak anymore upon the basis of this name to any man at all.”
18  With that they called them and charged them, nowhere to make any utterance or to teach upon the basis of the name of Jesus.
19  But in reply Peter and John said to them: “Whether it is righteous in the sight of God to listen to YOU rather than to God, judge for yourselves.
20  But as for us, we cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.”
21  So, when they had further threatened them, they released them, since they did not find any ground on which to punish them and on account of the people, because they were all glorifying God over what had occurred; 
22  for the man upon whom this sign of healing had occurred was more than forty years old.
23  After being released they went to their own people and reported what things the chief priests and the older men had said to them.
24  Upon hearing this they with one accord raised their voices to God and said: “Sovereign Lord, you are the One who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all the things in them,
25  and who through holy spirit said by the mouth of our forefather David, your servant, ‘Why did nations become tumultuous and peoples meditate upon empty things?
26  The kings of the earth took their stand and the rulers massed together as one against Jehovah and against his anointed one.’
27  Even so, both Herod and Pontius Pilate with [men of] nations and with peoples of Israel were in actuality gathered together in this city against your holy servant Jesus, whom you anointed,
28  in order to do what things your hand and counsel had foreordained to occur.
29  And now, Jehovah, give attention to their threats, and grant your slaves to keep speaking your word with all boldness,
30  while you stretch out your hand for healing and while signs and portents occur through the name of your holy servant Jesus.”
31  And when they had made supplication, the place in which they were gathered together was shaken;  and they were one and all filled with the holy spirit and were speaking the word of God with boldness.
32  Moreover, the multitude of those who had believed had one heart and soul, and not even one would say that any of the things he possessed was his own;  but they had all things in common.
33  Also, with great power the apostles continued giving forth the witness concerning the resurrection of the Lord Jesus;  and undeserved kindness in large measure was upon them all.
34  In fact, there was not one in need among them;  for all those who were possessors of fields or houses would sell them and bring the values of the things sold
35  and they would deposit them at the feet of the apostles. In turn distribution would be made to each one, just as he would have the need.
36  So Joseph, who was surnamed Barnabas by the apostles, which means, when translated, Son of Comfort, a Levite, a native of Cyprus,
37  possessing a piece of land, sold it and brought the money and deposited it at the feet of the apostles.
acts 5
5  However, a certain man, Ananias by name, together with Sapphira his wife, sold a possession
2  and secretly held back some of the price, his wife also knowing about it, and he brought just a part and deposited it at the feet of the apostles.
3  But Peter said: “Ananias, why has Satan emboldened you to play false to the holy spirit and to hold back secretly some of the price of the field?
4  As long as it remained with you did it not remain yours, and after it was sold did it not continue in your control? Why was it that you purposed such a deed as this in your heart? You have played false, not to men, but to God.”
5  On hearing these words Ananias fell down and expired. And great fear came over all those hearing of it.
6  But the younger men rose, wrapped him in cloths, and carried him out and buried him.
7  Now after an interval of about three hours his wife came in, not knowing what had happened.
8  Peter said to her: “Tell me, did YOU [two] sell the field for so much?” She said: “Yes, for so much.”
9  So Peter said to her: “Why was it agreed upon between YOU [two] to make a test of the spirit of Jehovah? Look! The feet of those who buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out.”
10  Instantly she fell down at his feet and expired. When the young men came in they found her dead, and they carried her out and buried her alongside her husband.
11  Consequently great fear came over the whole congregation and over all those hearing about these things.
12  Moreover, through the hands of the apostles many signs and portents continued to occur among the people;  and they were all with one accord in Solomon’s colonnade.
13  True, not a one of the others had the courage to join himself to them;  nevertheless, the people were extolling them.
14  More than that, believers in the Lord kept on being added, multitudes both of men and of women; 
15  so that they brought the sick out even into the broad ways and laid them there upon little beds and cots, in order that, as Peter would go by, at least his shadow might fall upon some one of them.
16  Also, the multitude from the cities around Jerusalem kept coming together, bearing sick people and those troubled with unclean spirits, and they would one and all be cured.
17  But the high priest and all those with him, the then existing sect of the Sadducees, rose and became filled with jealousy,
18  and they laid hands upon the apostles and put them in the public place of custody.
19  But during the night Jehovah’s angel opened the doors of the prison, brought them out and said:
20  “Be on YOUR way, and, having taken a stand in the temple, keep on speaking to the people all the sayings about this life.”
21  After hearing this, they entered into the temple at daybreak and began to teach. Now when the high priest and those with him arrived, they called together the Sanhedrin and all the assembly of older men of the sons of Israel, and they sent out to the jail to have them brought.
22  But when the officers got there they did not find them in the prison. So they returned and made report,
23  saying: “The jail we found locked with all security and the guards standing at the doors, but on opening up we found no one inside.”
24  Well, when both the captain of the temple and the chief priests heard these words, they fell into a quandary over these matters as to what this would come to.
25  But a certain man arrived and reported to them: “Look! The men YOU put in the prison are in the temple, standing and teaching the people.”
26  Then the captain went off with his officers and proceeded to bring them, but without violence, as they were afraid of being stoned by the people.
27  So they brought them and stood them in the Sanhedrin hall. And the high priest questioned them
28  and said: “We positively ordered YOU not to keep teaching upon the basis of this name, and yet, look! YOU have filled Jerusalem with YOUR teaching, and YOU are determined to bring the blood of this man upon us.”
29  In answer Peter and the [other] apostles said: “We must obey God as ruler rather than men.
30  The God of our forefathers raised up Jesus, whom YOU slew, hanging him upon a stake.
31  God exalted this one as Chief Agent and Savior to his right hand, to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins.
32  And we are witnesses of these matters, and so is the holy spirit, which God has given to those obeying him as ruler.”
33  When they heard this, they felt deeply cut and were wanting to do away with them.
34  But a certain man rose in the Sanhedrin, a Pharisee named Gamaliel, a Law teacher esteemed by all the people, and gave the command to put the men outside for a little while.
35  And he said to them: “Men of Israel, pay attention to yourselves as to what YOU intend to do respecting these men.
36  For instance, before these days Theudas rose, saying he himself was somebody, and a number of men, about four hundred, joined his party. But he was done away with, and all those who were obeying him were dispersed and came to nothing.
37  After him Judas the Galilean rose in the days of the registration, and he drew off people after him. And yet that man perished, and all those who were obeying him were scattered abroad.
38  And so, under the present circumstances, I say to YOU, Do not meddle with these men, but let them alone;  (because, if this scheme or this work is from men, it will be overthrown; 
39  but if it is from God, YOU will not be able to overthrow them; ) otherwise, YOU may perhaps be found fighters actually against God.”
40  At this they gave heed to him, and they summoned the apostles, flogged them, and ordered them to stop speaking upon the basis of Jesus’ name, and let them go.
41  These, therefore, went their way from before the Sanhedrin, rejoicing because they had been counted worthy to be dishonored in behalf of his name.
42  And every day in the temple and from house to house they continued without letup teaching and declaring the good news about the Christ, Jesus.
acts 6
6  Now in these days, when the disciples were increasing, a murmuring arose on the part of the Greek-speaking Jews against the Hebrew-speaking Jews, because their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution.
2  So the twelve called the multitude of the disciples to them and said: “It is not pleasing for us to leave the word of God to distribute [food] to tables.
3  So, brothers, search out for yourselves seven certified men from among YOU, full of spirit and wisdom, that we may appoint them over this necessary business; 
4  but we shall devote ourselves to prayer and to the ministry of the word.”
5  And the thing spoken was pleasing to the whole multitude, and they selected Stephen, a man full of faith and holy spirit, and Philip and Prochorus and Nicanor and Timon and Parmenas and Nicolaus, a proselyte of Antioch; 
6  and they placed them before the apostles, and, after having prayed, these laid their hands upon them.
7  Consequently the word of God went on growing, and the number of the disciples kept multiplying in Jerusalem very much;  and a great crowd of priests began to be obedient to the faith.
8  Now Stephen, full of graciousness and power, was performing great portents and signs among the people.
9  But certain men rose up of those from the so-called Synagogue of the Freedmen, and of the Cyrenians and Alexandrians and of those from Cilicia and Asia, to dispute with Stephen; 
10  and yet they could not hold their own against the wisdom and the spirit with which he was speaking.
11  Then they secretly induced men to say: “We have heard him speaking blasphemous sayings against Moses and God.”
12  And they stirred up the people and the older men and the scribes, and, coming upon him suddenly, they took him by force and led him to the Sanhedrin.
13  And they brought forward false witnesses, who said: “This man does not stop speaking things against this holy place and against the Law.
14  For instance, we have heard him say that this Jesus the Nazarene will throw down this place and change the customs that Moses handed down to us.”
15  And as all those sitting in the Sanhedrin gazed at him, they saw that his face was as an angel’s face.
acts 7
7  But the high priest said: “Are these things so?”
2  He said: “Men, brothers and fathers, hear. The God of glory appeared to our forefather Abraham while he was in Mesopotamia, before he took up residence in Haran,
3  and he said to him, ‘Go out from your land and from your relatives and come on into the land I shall show you.’
4  Then he went out from the land of the Chaldeans and took up residence in Haran. And from there, after his father died, [God] caused him to change his residence to this land in which YOU now dwell.
5  And yet he did not give him any inheritable possession in it, no, not a footbreadth;  but he promised to give it to him as a possession, and after him to his seed, while as yet he had no child.
6  Moreover, God spoke to this effect, that his seed would be alien residents in a foreign land and [the people] would enslave them and afflict [them] for four hundred years.
7  ‘And that nation for which they will slave I shall judge,’ God said, ‘and after these things they will come out and will render sacred service to me in this place.’
8  “He also gave him a covenant of circumcision;  and thus he became the father of Isaac and circumcised him on the eighth day, and Isaac of Jacob, and Jacob of the twelve family heads.
9  And the family heads became jealous of Joseph and sold him into Egypt. But God was with him,
10  and he delivered him out of all his tribulations and gave him graciousness and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt. And he appointed him to govern Egypt and his whole house.
11  But a famine came upon the whole of Egypt and Canaan, even a great tribulation;  and our forefathers were not finding any provisions.
12  But Jacob heard there were foodstuffs in Egypt and he sent our forefathers out the first time.
13  And during the second time Joseph was made known to his brothers;  and the family stock of Joseph became manifest to Pharaoh.
14  So Joseph sent out and called Jacob his father and all his relatives from that place, to the number of seventy-five souls.
15  Jacob went down into Egypt. And he deceased;  and so did our forefathers,
16  and they were transferred to Shechem and were laid in the tomb that Abraham had bought for a price with silver money from the sons of Hamor in Shechem.
17  “Just as the time was approaching for [fulfillment of] the promise that God had openly declared to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt,
18  until there rose a different king over Egypt, who did not know of Joseph.
19  This one used statecraft against our race and wrongfully forced the fathers to expose their infants, that they might not be preserved alive.
20  In that particular time Moses was born, and he was divinely beautiful. And he was nursed three months in [his] father’s home.
21  But when he was exposed, the daughter of Pharaoh picked him up and brought him up as her own son.
22  Consequently Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. In fact, he was powerful in his words and deeds.
23  “Now when the time of his fortieth year was being fulfilled, it came into his heart to make an inspection of his brothers, the sons of Israel.
24  And when he caught sight of a certain one being unjustly treated, he defended him and executed vengeance for the one being abused by striking the Egyptian down.
25  He was supposing his brothers would grasp that God was giving them salvation by his hand, but they did not grasp [it].
26  And the next day he appeared to them as they were fighting, and he tried to bring them together again in peace, saying, ‘Men, YOU are brothers. Why do YOU treat each other unjustly?’
27  But the one that was treating his neighbor unjustly thrust him away, saying, ‘Who appointed you ruler and judge over us?
28  You do not want to do away with me in the same manner that you did away with the Egyptian yesterday, do you?’
29  At this speech Moses took to flight and became an alien resident in the land of Midian, where he became the father of two sons.
30  “And when forty years were fulfilled, there appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai an angel in the fiery flame of a thornbush.
31  Now when Moses saw it he marveled at the sight. But as he was approaching to investigate, Jehovah’s voice came,
32  ‘I am the God of your forefathers, the God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob.’ Seized with trembling, Moses did not dare to investigate further.
33  Jehovah said to him, ‘Take the sandals off your feet, for the place on which you are standing is holy ground.
34  I have certainly seen the wrongful treatment of my people who are in Egypt, and I have heard their groaning and I have come down to deliver them. And now come, I will send you off to Egypt.’
35  This Moses, whom they disowned, saying, ‘Who appointed you ruler and judge?’ this man God sent off as both ruler and deliverer by the hand of the angel that appeared to him in the thornbush.
36  This man led them out after doing portents and signs in Egypt and in the Red Sea and in the wilderness for forty years.
37  “This is the Moses that said to the sons of Israel, ‘God will raise up for YOU from among YOUR brothers a prophet like me.’
38  This is he that came to be among the congregation in the wilderness with the angel that spoke to him on Mount Sinai and with our forefathers, and he received living sacred pronouncements to give YOU.
39  To him our forefathers refused to become obedient, but they thrust him aside and in their hearts they turned back to Egypt,
40  saying to Aaron, ‘Make gods for us to go ahead of us. For this Moses, who led us out of the land of Egypt, we do not know what has happened to him.’
41  So they made a calf in those days and brought up a sacrifice to the idol and began to enjoy themselves in the works of their hands.
42  So God turned and handed them over to render sacred service to the army of heaven, just as it is written in the book of the prophets, ‘It was not to me that YOU offered victims and sacrifices for forty years in the wilderness, was it, O house of Israel?
43  But it was the tent of Moloch and the star of the god Rephan that YOU took up, the figures which YOU made to worship them. Consequently I will deport YOU beyond Babylon.’
44  “Our forefathers had the tent of the witness in the wilderness, just as he gave orders when speaking to Moses to make it according to the pattern he had seen.
45  And our forefathers who succeeded to it also brought it in with Joshua into the land possessed by the nations, whom God thrust out from before our forefathers. Here it remained until the days of David.
46  He found favor in the sight of God and asked for [the privilege of] providing a habitation for the God of Jacob.
47  However, Solomon built a house for him.
48  Nevertheless, the Most High does not dwell in houses made with hands;  just as the prophet says,
49  ‘The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool. What sort of house will YOU build for me? Jehovah says. Or what is the place for my resting?
50  My hand made all these things, did it not?’
51  “Obstinate men and uncircumcised in hearts and ears, YOU are always resisting the holy spirit;  as YOUR forefathers did, so YOU do.
52  Which one of the prophets did YOUR forefathers not persecute? Yes, they killed those who made announcement in advance concerning the coming of the righteous One, whose betrayers and murderers YOU have now become,
53  YOU who received the Law as transmitted by angels but have not kept it.”
54  Well, at hearing these things they felt cut to their hearts and began to gnash their teeth at him.
55  But he, being full of holy spirit, gazed into heaven and caught sight of God’s glory and of Jesus standing at God’s right hand,
56  and he said: “Look! I behold the heavens opened up and the Son of man standing at God’s right hand.”
57  At this they cried out at the top of the voice and put their hands over their ears and rushed upon him with one accord.
58  And after throwing him outside the city, they began casting stones at him. And the witnesses laid down their outer garments at the feet of a young man called Saul.
59  And they went on casting stones at Stephen as he made appeal and said: “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.”
60  Then, bending his knees, he cried out with a strong voice: “Jehovah, do not charge this sin against them.” And after saying this he fell asleep [in death].
acts 8
8  Saul, for his part, was approving of the murder of him. On that day great persecution arose against the congregation that was in Jerusalem;  all except the apostles were scattered throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria.
2  But reverent men carried Stephen to the burial, and they made a great lamentation over him.
3  Saul, though, began to deal outrageously with the congregation. Invading one house after another and, dragging out both men and women, he would turn them over to prison.
4  However, those who had been scattered went through the land declaring the good news of the word.
5  Philip, for one, went down to the city of Samaria and began to preach the Christ to them.
6  With one accord the crowds were paying attention to the things said by Philip while they listened and looked at the signs he was performing.
7  For there were many that had unclean spirits, and these would cry out with a loud voice and come out. Moreover, many that were paralyzed and lame were cured.
8  So there came to be a great deal of joy in that city.
9  Now in the city there was a certain man named Simon, who, prior to this, had been practicing magical arts and amazing the nation of Samaria, saying he himself was somebody great.
10  And all of them, from the least to the greatest, would pay attention to him and say: “This man is the Power of God, which can be called Great.”
11  So they would pay attention to him because of his having amazed them for quite a while by his magical arts.
12  But when they believed Philip, who was declaring the good news of the kingdom of God and of the name of Jesus Christ, they proceeded to be baptized, both men and women.
13  Simon himself also became a believer, and, after being baptized, he was in constant attendance upon Philip;  and he was amazed at beholding signs and great powerful works taking place.
14  When the apostles in Jerusalem heard that Samaria had accepted the word of God, they dispatched Peter and John to them; 
15  and these went down and prayed for them to get holy spirit.
16  For it had not yet fallen upon any one of them, but they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
17  Then they went laying their hands upon them, and they began to receive holy spirit.
18  Now when Simon saw that through the laying on of the hands of the apostles the spirit was given, he offered them money,
19  saying: “Give me also this authority, that anyone upon whom I lay my hands may receive holy spirit.”
20  But Peter said to him: “May your silver perish with you, because you thought through money to get possession of the free gift of God.
21  You have neither part nor lot in this matter, for your heart is not straight in the sight of God.
22  Repent, therefore, of this badness of yours, and supplicate Jehovah that, if possible, the device of your heart may be forgiven you; 
23  for I see you are a poisonous gall and a bond of unrighteousness.”
24  In answer Simon said: “YOU men, make supplication for me to Jehovah that none of the things YOU have said may come upon me.”
25  Therefore, when they had given the witness thoroughly and had spoken the word of Jehovah, they turned back to Jerusalem, and they went declaring the good news to many villages of the Samaritans.
26  However, Jehovah’s angel spoke to Philip, saying: “Rise and go to the south to the road that runs down from Jerusalem to Gaza.” (This is a desert road.)
27  With that he rose and went, and, look! an Ethiopian eunuch, a man in power under Candace queen of the Ethiopians, and who was over all her treasure. He had gone to Jerusalem to worship,
28  but he was returning and was sitting in his chariot and reading aloud the prophet Isaiah.
29  So the spirit said to Philip: “Approach and join yourself to this chariot.”
30  Philip ran alongside and heard him reading aloud Isaiah the prophet, and he said: “Do you actually know what you are reading?”
31  He said: “Really, how could I ever do so, unless someone guided me?” And he entreated Philip to get on and sit down with him.
32  Now the passage of Scripture that he was reading aloud was this: “As a sheep he was brought to the slaughter, and as a lamb that is voiceless before its shearer, so he does not open his mouth.
33  During his humiliation the judgment was taken away from him. Who will tell the details of his generation? Because his life is taken away from the earth.”
34  In answer the eunuch said to Philip: “I beg you, About whom does the prophet say this? About himself or about some other man?”
35  Philip opened his mouth and, starting with this Scripture, he declared to him the good news about Jesus.
36  Now as they were going over the road, they came to a certain body of water, and the eunuch said: “Look! A body of water;  what prevents me from getting baptized?”
37  ——
38  With that he commanded the chariot to halt, and they both went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch;  and he baptized him.
39  When they had come up out of the water, Jehovah’s spirit quickly led Philip away, and the eunuch did not see him anymore, for he kept going on his way rejoicing.
40  But Philip was found to be in Ashdod, and he went through the territory and kept on declaring the good news to all the cities until he got to Caesarea.
acts 9
9  But Saul, still breathing threat and murder against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest
2  and asked him for letters to the synagogues in Damascus, in order that he might bring bound to Jerusalem any whom he found who belonged to The Way, both men and women.
3  Now as he was traveling he approached Damascus, when suddenly a light from heaven flashed around him,
4  and he fell to the ground and heard a voice say to him: “Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?”
5  He said: “Who are you, Lord?” He said: “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.
6  Nevertheless, rise and enter into the city, and what you must do will be told you.”
7  Now the men that were journeying with him were standing speechless, hearing, indeed, the sound of a voice, but not beholding any man.
8  But Saul got up from the ground, and though his eyes were opened he was seeing nothing. So they led him by the hand and conducted him into Damascus.
9  And for three days he did not see anything, and he neither ate nor drank.
10  There was in Damascus a certain disciple named Ananias, and the Lord said to him in a vision: “Ananias!” He said: “Here I am, Lord.”
11  The Lord said to him: “Rise, go to the street called Straight, and at the house of Judas look for a man named Saul, from Tarsus. For, look! he is praying,
12  and in a vision he has seen a man named Ananias come in and lay his hands upon him that he might recover sight.”
13  But Ananias answered: “Lord, I have heard from many about this man, how many injurious things he did to your holy ones in Jerusalem.
14  And here he has authority from the chief priests to put in bonds all those calling upon your name.”
15  But the Lord said to him: “Be on your way, because this man is a chosen vessel to me to bear my name to the nations as well as to kings and the sons of Israel.
16  For I shall show him plainly how many things he must suffer for my name.”
17  So Ananias went off and entered into the house, and he laid his hands upon him and said: “Saul, brother, the Lord, the Jesus that appeared to you on the road over which you were coming, has sent me forth, in order that you may recover sight and be filled with holy spirit.”
18  And immediately there fell from his eyes what looked like scales, and he recovered sight;  and he rose and was baptized,
19  and he took food and gained strength. He got to be for some days with the disciples in Damascus,
20  and immediately in the synagogues he began to preach Jesus, that this One is the Son of God.
21  But all those hearing him gave way to astonishment and would say: “Is this not the man that ravaged those in Jerusalem who call upon this name, and that had come here for this very purpose, that he might lead them bound to the chief priests?”
22  But Saul kept on acquiring power all the more and was confounding the Jews that dwelt in Damascus as he proved logically that this is the Christ.
23  Now when a good many days were coming to a close, the Jews took counsel together to do away with him.
24  However, their plot against him became known to Saul. But they were closely watching also the gates both day and night in order to do away with him.
25  So his disciples took him and let him down by night through an opening in the wall, lowering him in a basket.
26  On arriving in Jerusalem he made efforts to join himself to the disciples;  but they were all afraid of him, because they did not believe he was a disciple.
27  So Barnabas came to his aid and led him to the apostles, and he told them in detail how on the road he had seen the Lord and that he had spoken to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken boldly in the name of Jesus.
28  And he continued with them, walking in and out at Jerusalem, speaking boldly in the name of the Lord; 
29  and he was talking and disputing with the Greek-speaking Jews. But these made attempts to do away with him.
30  When the brothers detected this, they brought him down to Caesarea and sent him off to Tarsus.
31  Then, indeed, the congregation throughout the whole of Judea and Galilee and Samaria entered into a period of peace, being built up;  and as it walked in the fear of Jehovah and in the comfort of the holy spirit it kept on multiplying.
32  Now as Peter was going through all [parts] he came down also to the holy ones that dwelt in Lydda.
33  There he found a certain man named Aeneas, who had been lying flat on his cot for eight years, as he was paralyzed.
34  And Peter said to him: “Aeneas, Jesus Christ heals you. Rise and make up your bed.” And he rose immediately.
35  And all those who inhabited Lydda and the [plain of] Sharon saw him, and these turned to the Lord.
36  But in Joppa there was a certain disciple named Tabitha, which, when translated, means Dorcas. She abounded in good deeds and gifts of mercy that she was rendering.
37  But in those days she happened to fall sick and die. So they bathed her and laid her in an upper chamber.
38  Now as Lydda was near Joppa, when the disciples heard that Peter was in this city they dispatched two men to him to entreat [him]: “Please do not hesitate to come on as far as us.”
39  At that Peter rose and went with them. And when he arrived, they led him up into the upper chamber;  and all the widows presented themselves to him weeping and exhibiting many inner garments and outer garments that Dorcas used to make while she was with them.
40  But Peter put everybody outside and, bending his knees, he prayed, and, turning to the body, he said: “Tabitha, rise!” She opened her eyes and, as she caught sight of Peter, she sat up.
41  Giving her his hand, he raised her up, and he called the holy ones and the widows and presented her alive.
42  This became known throughout all Joppa, and many became believers on the Lord.
43  For quite a few days he remained in Joppa with a certain Simon, a tanner.
acts 10
10  Now in Caesarea there was a certain man named Cornelius, an army officer of the Italian band, as it was called,
2  a devout man and one fearing God together with all his household, and he made many gifts of mercy to the people and made supplication to God continually.
3  Just about the ninth hour of the day he saw plainly in a vision an angel of God come in to him and say to him: “Cornelius!”
4  The man gazed at him and, becoming frightened, said: “What is it, Lord?” He said to him: “Your prayers and gifts of mercy have ascended as a remembrance before God.
5  So now send men to Joppa and summon a certain Simon who is surnamed Peter.
6  This man is being entertained by a certain Simon, a tanner, who has a house by the sea.”
7  As soon as the angel that spoke to him had left, he called two of his house servants and a devout soldier from among those who were in constant attendance upon him,
8  and he related everything to them and dispatched them to Joppa.
9  The next day as they were pursuing their journey and were approaching the city, Peter went up to the housetop about the sixth hour to pray.
10  But he became very hungry and wanted to eat. While they were preparing, he fell into a trance
11  and beheld heaven opened and some sort of vessel descending like a great linen sheet being let down by its four extremities upon the earth; 
12  and in it there were all sorts of four-footed creatures and creeping things of the earth and birds of heaven.
13  And a voice came to him: “Rise, Peter, slaughter and eat!”
14  But Peter said: “Not at all, Lord, because never have I eaten anything defiled and unclean.”
15  And the voice [spoke] again to him, the second time: “You stop calling defiled the things God has cleansed.”
16  This occurred a third time, and immediately the vessel was taken up into heaven.
17  Now while Peter was in great perplexity inwardly over what the vision he had seen might mean, look! the men dispatched by Cornelius had made inquiries for Simon’s house and stood there at the gate.
18  And they called out and inquired whether Simon who was surnamed Peter was being entertained there.
19  As Peter was going over in his mind about the vision, the spirit said: “Look! Three men are seeking you.
20  However, rise, go downstairs and be on your way with them, not doubting at all, because I have dispatched them.”
21  So Peter went downstairs to the men and said: “Look! I am the one YOU are seeking. What is the cause for which YOU are present?”
22  They said: “Cornelius, an army officer, a man righteous and fearing God and well reported by the whole nation of the Jews, was given divine instructions by a holy angel to send for you to come to his house and to hear the things you have to say.”
23  Therefore he invited them in and entertained them. The next day he rose and went off with them, and some of the brothers that were from Joppa went with him.
24  On the day after that he entered into Caesarea. Cornelius, of course, was expecting them and had called together his relatives and intimate friends.
25  As Peter entered, Cornelius met him, fell down at his feet and did obeisance to him.
26  But Peter lifted him up, saying: “Rise;  I myself am also a man.”
27  And as he conversed with him he went in and found many people assembled,
28  and he said to them: “YOU well know how unlawful it is for a Jew to join himself to or approach a man of another race;  and yet God has shown me I should call no man defiled or unclean.
29  Hence I came, really without objection, when I was sent for. Therefore I inquire the reason that YOU have sent for me.”
30  Accordingly Cornelius said: “Four days ago counting from this hour I was praying in my house at the ninth hour, when, look! a man in bright raiment stood before me
31  and said, ‘Cornelius, your prayer has been favorably heard and your gifts of mercy have been remembered before God.
32  Send, therefore, to Joppa and call for Simon, who is surnamed Peter. This man is being entertained in the house of Simon, a tanner, by the sea.’
33  Therefore I at once sent to you, and you did well in coming here. And so at this time we are all present before God to hear all the things you have been commanded by Jehovah to say.”
34  At this Peter opened his mouth and said: “For a certainty I perceive that God is not partial,
35  but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.
36  He sent out the word to the sons of Israel to declare to them the good news of peace through Jesus Christ: this One is Lord of all [others].
37  YOU know the subject that was talked about throughout the whole of Judea, starting from Galilee after the baptism that John preached,
38  namely, Jesus who was from Nazareth, how God anointed him with holy spirit and power, and he went through the land doing good and healing all those oppressed by the Devil;  because God was with him.
39  And we are witnesses of all the things he did both in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem;  but they also did away with him by hanging him on a stake.
40  God raised this One up on the third day and granted him to become manifest,
41  not to all the people, but to witnesses appointed beforehand by God, to us, who ate and drank with him after his rising from the dead.
42  Also, he ordered us to preach to the people and to give a thorough witness that this is the One decreed by God to be judge of the living and the dead.
43  To him all the prophets bear witness, that everyone putting faith in him gets forgiveness of sins through his name.”
44  While Peter was yet speaking about these matters the holy spirit fell upon all those hearing the word.
45  And the faithful ones that had come with Peter who were of those circumcised were amazed, because the free gift of the holy spirit was being poured out also upon people of the nations.
46  For they heard them speaking with tongues and magnifying God. Then Peter responded:
47  “Can anyone forbid water so that these might not be baptized who have received the holy spirit even as we have?”
48  With that he commanded them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they requested him to remain for some days.
acts 11
11  Now the apostles and the brothers that were in Judea heard that people of the nations had also received the word of God.
2  So when Peter came up to Jerusalem, the [supporters] of circumcision began to contend with him,
3  saying he had gone into the house of men that were not circumcised and had eaten with them.
4  At this Peter commenced and went on to explain the particulars to them, saying:
5  “I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision, some sort of vessel descending like a great linen sheet being let down by its four extremities from heaven, and it came clear to me.
6  Gazing into it, I made observations and saw four-footed creatures of the earth and wild beasts and creeping things and birds of heaven.
7  I also heard a voice say to me, ‘Rise, Peter, slaughter and eat!’
8  But I said, ‘Not at all, Lord, because a defiled or unclean thing has never entered into my mouth.’
9  The second time the voice from heaven answered, ‘You stop calling defiled the things God has cleansed.’
10  This occurred for a third time, and everything was pulled up again into heaven.
11  Also, look! at that instant there were three men standing at the house in which we were, they having been dispatched from Caesarea to me.
12  So the spirit told me to go with them, not doubting at all. But these six brothers also went with me, and we entered into the house of the man.
13  “He reported to us how he saw the angel stand in his house and say, ‘Dispatch men to Joppa and send for Simon who is surnamed Peter,
14  and he will speak those things to you by which you and all your household may get saved.’
15  But when I started to speak, the holy spirit fell upon them just as it did also upon us in [the] beginning.
16  At this I called to mind the saying of the Lord, how he used to say, ‘John, for his part, baptized with water, but YOU will be baptized in holy spirit.’
17  If, therefore, God gave the same free gift to them as he also did to us who have believed upon the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I that I should be able to hinder God?”
18  Now when they heard these things, they acquiesced, and they glorified God, saying: “Well, then, God has granted repentance for the purpose of life to people of the nations also.”
19  Consequently those who had been scattered by the tribulation that arose over Stephen went through as far as Phoenicia and Cyprus and Antioch, but speaking the word to no one except to Jews only.
20  However, out of them there were some men of Cyprus and Cyrene that came to Antioch and began talking to the Greek-speaking people, declaring the good news of the Lord Jesus.
21  Furthermore, the hand of Jehovah was with them, and a great number that became believers turned to the Lord.
22  The account about them got to the ears of the congregation that was in Jerusalem, and they sent out Barnabas as far as Antioch.
23  When he arrived and saw the undeserved kindness of God, he rejoiced and began to encourage them all to continue in the Lord with hearty purpose; 
24  for he was a good man and full of holy spirit and of faith. And a considerable crowd was added to the Lord.
25  So he went off to Tarsus to make a thorough search for Saul
26  and, after he found him, he brought him to Antioch. It thus came about that for a whole year they gathered together with them in the congregation and taught quite a crowd, and it was first in Antioch that the disciples were by divine providence called Christians.
27  Now in these days prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch.
28  One of them named Agabus rose and proceeded to indicate through the spirit that a great famine was about to come upon the entire inhabited earth;  which, for that matter, did take place in the time of Claudius.
29  So those of the disciples determined, each of them according as anyone could afford it, to send a relief ministration to the brothers dwelling in Judea; 
30  and this they did, dispatching it to the older men by the hand of Barnabas and Saul.
acts 12
12  About that particular time Herod the king applied his hands to mistreating some of those of the congregation.
2  He did away with James the brother of John by the sword.
3  As he saw it was pleasing to the Jews, he went on to arrest Peter also. (As it was, those were days of the unfermented cakes.)
4  And laying hold of him, he put him in prison, turning him over to four shifts of four soldiers each to guard him, as he intended to produce him for the people after the passover.
5  Consequently Peter was being kept in the prison;  but prayer to God for him was being carried on intensely by the congregation.
6  Now when Herod was about to produce him, that night Peter was sleeping bound with two chains between two soldiers, and guards before the door were keeping the prison.
7  But, look! Jehovah’s angel stood by, and a light shone in the prison cell. Striking Peter on the side, he roused him, saying: “Rise quickly!” And his chains fell off his hands.
8  The angel said to him: “Gird yourself and bind your sandals on.” He did so. Finally he said to him: “Put your outer garment on and keep following me.”
9  And he went out and kept following him, but he did not know that what was happening through the angel was real. In fact, he supposed he was seeing a vision.
10  Going through the first sentinel guard and the second they got to the iron gate leading into the city, and this opened to them of its own accord. And after they went out they advanced down one street, and immediately the angel departed from him.
11  And Peter, coming to himself, said: “Now I actually know that Jehovah sent his angel forth and delivered me out of Herod’s hand and from all that the people of the Jews were expecting.”
12  And after he considered it, he went to the house of Mary the mother of John who was surnamed Mark, where quite a few were gathered together and praying.
13  When he knocked at the door of the gateway, a servant girl named Rhoda came to attend to the call,
14  and, upon recognizing the voice of Peter, out of joy she did not open the gate, but ran inside and reported that Peter was standing before the gateway.
15  They said to her: “You are mad.” But she kept on strongly asserting it was so. They began to say: “It is his angel.”
16  But Peter remained there knocking. When they opened, they saw him and were astonished.
17  But he motioned to them with his hand to be silent and told them in detail how Jehovah brought him out of the prison, and he said: “Report these things to James and the brothers.” With that he went out and journeyed to another place.
18  Well, when it became day, there was no little stir among the soldiers over what really had become of Peter.
19  Herod made diligent search for him and, when not finding him, he examined the guards and commanded them to be led off [to punishment];  and he went down from Judea to Caesarea and spent some time there.
20  Now he was in a fighting mood against the people of Tyre and of Sidon. So with one accord they came to him and, after persuading Blastus, who was in charge of the bedchamber of the king, they began suing for peace, because their country was supplied with food from that of the king.
21  But on a set day Herod clothed himself with royal raiment and sat down upon the judgment seat and began giving them a public address.
22  In turn the assembled people began shouting: “A god’s voice, and not a man’s!”
23  Instantly the angel of Jehovah struck him, because he did not give the glory to God;  and he became eaten up with worms and expired.
24  But the word of Jehovah went on growing and spreading.
25  As for Barnabas and Saul, after having fully carried out the relief ministration in Jerusalem, they returned and took along with them John, the one surnamed Mark.
acts 13
13  Now in Antioch there were prophets and teachers in the local congregation, Barnabas as well as Symeon who was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen who was educated with Herod the district ruler, and Saul.
2  As they were publicly ministering to Jehovah and fasting, the holy spirit said: “Of all persons set Barnabas and Saul apart for me for the work to which I have called them.”
3  Then they fasted and prayed and laid their hands upon them and let them go.
4  Accordingly these men, sent out by the holy spirit, went down to Seleucia, and from there they sailed away to Cyprus.
5  And when they got to be in Salamis they began publishing the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews. They had John also as an attendant.
6  When they had gone through the whole island as far as Paphos, they met up with a certain man, a sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew whose name was Bar-Jesus,
7  and he was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man. Calling Barnabas and Saul to him, this man earnestly sought to hear the word of God.
8  But Elymas the sorcerer (that, in fact, is the way his name is translated) began opposing them, seeking to turn the proconsul away from the faith.
9  Saul, who is also Paul, becoming filled with holy spirit, looked at him intently
10  and said: “O man full of every sort of fraud and every sort of villainy, you son of the Devil, you enemy of everything righteous, will you not quit distorting the right ways of Jehovah?
11  Well, then, look! Jehovah’s hand is upon you, and you will be blind, not seeing the sunlight for a period of time.” Instantly a thick mist and darkness fell upon him, and he went around seeking men to lead him by the hand.
12  Then the proconsul, upon seeing what had happened, became a believer, as he was astounded at the teaching of Jehovah.
13  The men, together with Paul, now put out to sea from Paphos and arrived at Perga in Pamphylia. But John withdrew from them and returned to Jerusalem.
14  They, however, went on from Perga and came to Antioch in Pisidia and, going into the synagogue on the sabbath day, they took a seat.
15  After the public reading of the Law and of the Prophets the presiding officers of the synagogue sent out to them, saying: “Men, brothers, if there is any word of encouragement for the people that YOU have, tell it.”
16  So Paul rose, and motioning with his hand, he said: “Men, Israelites and YOU [others] that fear God, hear.
17  The God of this people Israel chose our forefathers, and he exalted the people during their alien residence in the land of Egypt and brought them out of it with an uplifted arm.
18  And for a period of about forty years he put up with their manner of action in the wilderness.
19  After destroying seven nations in the land of Canaan, he distributed the land of them by lot:
20  all that during about four hundred and fifty years. “And after these things he gave them judges until Samuel the prophet.
21  But from then on they demanded a king, and God gave them Saul son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, for forty years.
22  And after removing him, he raised up for them David as king, respecting whom he bore witness and said, ‘I have found David the son of Jesse, a man agreeable to my heart, who will do all the things I desire.’
23  From the offspring of this [man] according to his promise God has brought to Israel a savior, Jesus,
24  after John, in advance of the entry of that One, had preached publicly to all the people of Israel baptism [in symbol] of repentance.
25  But as John was fulfilling his course, he would say, ‘What do YOU suppose I am? I am not he. But, look! one is coming after me the sandals of whose feet I am not worthy to untie.’
26  “Men, brothers, YOU sons of the stock of Abraham and those [others] among YOU who fear God, the word of this salvation has been sent forth to us.
27  For the inhabitants of Jerusalem and their rulers did not know this One, but, when acting as judges, they fulfilled the things voiced by the Prophets, which things are read aloud every Sabbath,
28  and, although they found no cause for death, they demanded of Pilate that he be executed.
29  When, now, they had accomplished all the things written about him, they took him down from the stake and laid him in a memorial tomb.
30  But God raised him up from the dead; 
31  and for many days he became visible to those who had gone up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now his witnesses to the people.
32  “And so we are declaring to YOU the good news about the promise made to the forefathers,
33  that God has entirely fulfilled it to us their children in that he resurrected Jesus;  even as it is written in the second psalm, ‘You are my son, I have become your Father this day.’
34  And that fact that he resurrected him from the dead destined no more to return to corruption, he has stated in this way, ‘I will give YOU people the loving-kindnesses to David that are faithful.’
35  Hence he also says in another psalm, ‘You will not allow your loyal one to see corruption.’
36  For David, on the one hand, served the express will of God in his own generation and fell asleep [in death] and was laid with his forefathers and did see corruption.
37  On the other hand, he whom God raised up did not see corruption.
38  “Let it therefore be known to YOU, brothers, that through this One a forgiveness of sins is being published to YOU; 
39  and that from all the things from which YOU could not be declared guiltless by means of the law of Moses, everyone who believes is declared guiltless by means of this One.
40  Therefore see to it that what is said in the Prophets does not come upon YOU,
41  ‘Behold it, YOU scorners, and wonder at it, and vanish away, because I am working a work in YOUR days, a work that YOU will by no means believe even if anyone relates it to YOU in detail.’”
42  Now when they were going out, the people began entreating for these matters to be spoken to them on the following sabbath.
43  So after the synagogue assembly was dissolved, many of the Jews and of the proselytes who worshiped [God] followed Paul and Barnabas, who in speaking to them began urging them to continue in the undeserved kindness of God.
44  The next sabbath nearly all the city gathered together to hear the word of Jehovah.
45  When the Jews got sight of the crowds, they were filled with jealousy and began blasphemously contradicting the things being spoken by Paul.
46  And so, talking with boldness, Paul and Barnabas said: “It was necessary for the word of God to be spoken first to YOU. Since YOU are thrusting it away from YOU and do not judge yourselves worthy of everlasting life, look! we turn to the nations.
47  In fact, Jehovah has laid commandment upon us in these words, ‘I have appointed you as a light of nations, for you to be a salvation to the extremity of the earth.’”
48  When those of the nations heard this, they began to rejoice and to glorify the word of Jehovah, and all those who were rightly disposed for everlasting life became believers.
49  Furthermore, the word of Jehovah went on being carried throughout the whole country.
50  But the Jews stirred up the reputable women who worshiped [God] and the principal men of the city, and they raised up a persecution against Paul and Barnabas and threw them outside their boundaries.
51  These shook the dust off their feet against them and went to Iconium.
52  And the disciples continued to be filled with joy and holy spirit.
acts 14
14  Now in Iconium they entered together into the synagogue of the Jews and spoke in such a manner that a great multitude of both Jews and Greeks became believers.
2  But the Jews that did not believe stirred up and wrongly influenced the souls of people of the nations against the brothers.
3  Therefore they spent considerable time speaking with boldness by the authority of Jehovah, who bore witness to the word of his undeserved kindness by granting signs and portents to occur through their hands.
4  However, the multitude of the city was split, and some were for the Jews but others for the apostles.
5  Now when a violent attempt took place on the part of both people of the nations and Jews with their rulers, to treat them insolently and pelt them with stones,
6  they, on being informed of it, fled to the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra and Derbe and the country round about; 
7  and there they went on declaring the good news.
8  Now in Lystra there was sitting a certain man disabled in his feet, lame from his mother’s womb, and he had never walked at all.
9  This man was listening to Paul speak, who, on looking at him intently and seeing he had faith to be made well,
10  said with a loud voice: “Stand up erect on your feet.” And he leaped up and began walking.
11  And the crowds, seeing what Paul had done, raised their voices, saying in the Lycaonian tongue: “The gods have become like humans and have come down to us!”
12  And they went calling Barnabas Zeus, but Paul Hermes, since he was the one taking the lead in speaking.
13  And the priest of Zeus, whose [temple] was before the city, brought bulls and garlands to the gates and was desiring to offer sacrifices with the crowds.
14  However, when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of it, they ripped their outer garments and leaped out into the crowd, crying out
15  and saying: “Men, why are YOU doing these things? We also are humans having the same infirmities as YOU do, and are declaring the good news to YOU, for YOU to turn from these vain things to the living God, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and all the things in them.
16  In the past generations he permitted all the nations to go on in their ways,
17  although, indeed, he did not leave himself without witness in that he did good, giving YOU rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling YOUR hearts to the full with food and good cheer.”
18  And yet by saying these things they scarcely restrained the crowds from sacrificing to them.
19  But Jews arrived from Antioch and Iconium and persuaded the crowds, and they stoned Paul and dragged him outside the city, imagining he was dead.
20  However, when the disciples surrounded him, he rose up and entered into the city. And on the next day he left with Barnabas for Derbe.
21  And after declaring the good news to that city and making quite a few disciples, they returned to Lystra and to Iconium and to Antioch,
22  strengthening the souls of the disciples, encouraging them to remain in the faith and [saying]: “We must enter into the kingdom of God through many tribulations.”
23  Moreover, they appointed older men for them in each congregation and, offering prayer with fastings, they committed them to Jehovah in whom they had become believers.
24  And they went through Pisidia and came into Pamphylia,
25  and, after speaking the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia.
26  And from there they sailed off for Antioch, where they had been entrusted to the undeserved kindness of God for the work they had fully performed.
27  When they had arrived and had gathered the congregation together, they proceeded to relate the many things God had done by means of them, and that he had opened to the nations the door to faith.
28  So they spent not a little time with the disciples.
acts 15
15  And certain men came down from Judea and began to teach the brothers: “Unless YOU get circumcised according to the custom of Moses, YOU cannot be saved.”
2  But when there had occurred no little dissension and disputing by Paul and Barnabas with them, they arranged for Paul and Barnabas and some others of them to go up to the apostles and older men in Jerusalem regarding this dispute.
3  Accordingly, after being conducted partway by the congregation, these men continued on their way through both Phoenicia and Samaria, relating in detail the conversion of people of the nations, and they were causing great joy to all the brothers.
4  On arriving in Jerusalem they were kindly received by the congregation and the apostles and the older men, and they recounted the many things God had done by means of them.
5  Yet, some of those of the sect of the Pharisees that had believed rose up from their seats and said: “It is necessary to circumcise them and charge them to observe the law of Moses.”
6  And the apostles and the older men gathered together to see about this affair.
7  Now when much disputing had taken place, Peter rose and said to them: “Men, brothers, YOU well know that from early days God made the choice among YOU that through my mouth people of the nations should hear the word of the good news and believe; 
8  and God, who knows the heart, bore witness by giving them the holy spirit, just as he did to us also.
9  And he made no distinction at all between us and them, but purified their hearts by faith.
10  Now, therefore, why are YOU making a test of God by imposing upon the neck of the disciples a yoke that neither our forefathers nor we were capable of bearing?
11  On the contrary, we trust to get saved through the undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus in the same way as those people also.”
12  At that the entire multitude became silent, and they began to listen to Barnabas and Paul relate the many signs and portents that God did through them among the nations.
13  After they quit speaking, James answered, saying: “Men, brothers, hear me.
14  Symeon has related thoroughly how God for the first time turned his attention to the nations to take out of them a people for his name.
15  And with this the words of the Prophets agree, just as it is written,
16  ‘After these things I shall return and rebuild the booth of David that is fallen down;  and I shall rebuild its ruins and erect it again,
17  in order that those who remain of the men may earnestly seek Jehovah, together with people of all the nations, people who are called by my name, says Jehovah, who is doing these things,
18  known from of old.’
19  Hence my decision is not to trouble those from the nations who are turning to God,
20  but to write them to abstain from things polluted by idols and from fornication and from what is strangled and from blood.
21  For from ancient times Moses has had in city after city those who preach him, because he is read aloud in the synagogues on every sabbath.”
22  Then the apostles and the older men together with the whole congregation favored sending chosen men from among them to Antioch along with Paul and Barnabas, namely, Judas who was called Barsabbas and Silas, leading men among the brothers; 
23  and by their hand they wrote: “The apostles and the older men, brothers, to those brothers in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia who are from the nations: Greetings!
24  Since we have heard that some from among us have caused YOU trouble with speeches, trying to subvert YOUR souls, although we did not give them any instructions,
25  we have come to a unanimous accord and have favored choosing men to send to YOU together with our loved ones, Barnabas and Paul,
26  men that have delivered up their souls for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
27  We are therefore dispatching Judas and Silas, that they also may report the same things by word.
28  For the holy spirit and we ourselves have favored adding no further burden to YOU, except these necessary things,
29  to keep abstaining from things sacrificed to idols and from blood and from things strangled and from fornication. If YOU carefully keep yourselves from these things, YOU will prosper. Good health to YOU!”
30  Accordingly, when these men were let go, they went down to Antioch, and they gathered the multitude together and handed them the letter.
31  After reading it, they rejoiced over the encouragement.
32  And Judas and Silas, since they themselves were also prophets, encouraged the brothers with many a discourse and strengthened them.
33  So, when they had passed some time, they were let go in peace by the brothers to those who had sent them out.
34  ——
35  However, Paul and Barnabas continued spending time in Antioch teaching and declaring, with many others also, the good news of the word of Jehovah.
36  Now after some days Paul said to Barnabas: “Above all things, let us return and visit the brothers in every one of the cities in which we published the word of Jehovah to see how they are.”
37  For his part, Barnabas was determined to take along also John, who was called Mark.
38  But Paul did not think it proper to be taking this one along with them, seeing that he had departed from them from Pamphylia and had not gone with them to the work.
39  At this there occurred a sharp burst of anger, so that they separated from each other;  and Barnabas took Mark along and sailed away to Cyprus.
40  Paul selected Silas and went off after he had been entrusted by the brothers to the undeserved kindness of Jehovah.
41  But he went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the congregations.
acts 16
16  So he arrived at Derbe and also at Lystra. And, look! a certain disciple was there by the name of Timothy, the son of a believing Jewish woman but of a Greek father,
2  and he was well reported on by the brothers in Lystra and Iconium.
3  Paul expressed the desire for this man to go out with him, and he took him and circumcised him because of the Jews that were in those places, for one and all knew that his father was a Greek.
4  Now as they traveled on through the cities they would deliver to those there for observance the decrees that had been decided upon by the apostles and older men who were in Jerusalem.
5  Therefore, indeed, the congregations continued to be made firm in the faith and to increase in number from day to day.
6  Moreover, they went through Phrygia and the country of Galatia, because they were forbidden by the holy spirit to speak the word in the [district of] Asia.
7  Further, when getting down to Mysia they made efforts to go into Bithynia, but the spirit of Jesus did not permit them.
8  So they passed Mysia by and came down to Troas.
9  And during the night a vision appeared to Paul: a certain Macedonian man was standing and entreating him and saying: “Step over into Macedonia and help us.”
10  Now as soon as he had seen the vision, we sought to go forth into Macedonia, drawing the conclusion that God had summoned us to declare the good news to them.
11  Therefore we put out to sea from Troas and came with a straight run to Samothrace, but on the following day to Neapolis,
12  and from there to Philippi, a colony, which is the principal city of the district of Macedonia. We continued in this city, spending some days.
13  And on the sabbath day we went forth outside the gate beside a river, where we were thinking there was a place of prayer;  and we sat down and began speaking to the women that had assembled.
14  And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira and a worshiper of God, was listening, and Jehovah opened her heart wide to pay attention to the things being spoken by Paul.
15  Now when she and her household got baptized, she said with entreaty: “If YOU men have judged me to be faithful to Jehovah, enter into my house and stay.” And she just made us come.
16  And it happened that as we were going to the place of prayer, a certain servant girl with a spirit, a demon of divination, met us. She used to furnish her masters with much gain by practicing the art of prediction.
17  This [girl] kept following Paul and us and crying out with the words: “These men are slaves of the Most High God, who are publishing to YOU the way of salvation.”
18  This she kept doing for many days. Finally Paul got tired of it and turned and said to the spirit: “I order you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her.” And it came out that very hour.
19  Well, when her masters saw that their hope of gain had left, they laid hold of Paul and Silas and dragged them into the marketplace to the rulers,
20  and, leading them up to the civil magistrates, they said: “These men are disturbing our city very much, they being Jews,
21  and they are publishing customs that it is not lawful for us to take up or practice, seeing we are Romans.”
22  And the crowd rose up together against them;  and the civil magistrates, after tearing the outer garments off them, gave the command to beat them with rods.
23  After they had inflicted many blows upon them, they threw them into prison, ordering the jailer to keep them securely.
24  Because he got such an order, he threw them into the inner prison and made their feet fast in the stocks.
25  But about the middle of the night Paul and Silas were praying and praising God with song;  yes, the prisoners were hearing them.
26  Suddenly a great earthquake occurred, so that the foundations of the jail were shaken. Moreover, all the doors were instantly opened, and the bonds of all were loosened.
27  The jailer, being awakened out of sleep and seeing the prison doors were open, drew his sword and was about to do away with himself, imagining that the prisoners had escaped.
28  But Paul called out with a loud voice, saying: “Do not hurt yourself, for we are all here!”
29  So he asked for lights and leaped in and, seized with trembling, he fell down before Paul and Silas.
30  And he brought them outside and said: “Sirs, what must I do to get saved?”
31  They said: “Believe on the Lord Jesus and you will get saved, you and your household.”
32  And they spoke the word of Jehovah to him together with all those in his house.
33  And he took them along in that hour of the night and bathed their stripes;  and, one and all, he and his were baptized without delay.
34  And he brought them into his house and set a table before them, and he rejoiced greatly with all his household now that he had believed God.
35  When it became day, the civil magistrates dispatched the constables to say: “Release those men.”
36  So the jailer reported their words to Paul: “The civil magistrates have dispatched men that YOU [two] might be released. Now, therefore, come out and go YOUR way in peace.”
37  But Paul said to them: “They flogged us publicly uncondemned, men who are Romans, and threw us into prison;  and are they now throwing us out secretly? No, indeed! but let them come themselves and bring us out.”
38  So the constables reported these sayings to the civil magistrates. These grew fearful when they heard that the men were Romans.
39  Consequently they came and entreated them and, after bringing them out, they requested them to depart from the city.
40  But they came out of the prison and went to the home of Lydia, and when they saw the brothers they encouraged them and departed.
acts 17
17  They now journeyed through Amphipolis and Apollonia and came to Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews.
2  So according to Paul’s custom he went inside to them, and for three sabbaths he reasoned with them from the Scriptures,
3  explaining and proving by references that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead, and [saying]: “This is the Christ, this Jesus whom I am publishing to YOU.”
4  As a result some of them became believers and associated themselves with Paul and Silas, and a great multitude of the Greeks who worshiped [God] and not a few of the principal women did so.
5  But the Jews, getting jealous, took into their company certain wicked men of the marketplace idlers and formed a mob and proceeded to throw the city into an uproar. And they assaulted the house of Jason and went seeking to have them brought forth to the rabble.
6  When they did not find them they dragged Jason and certain brothers to the city rulers, crying out: “These men that have overturned the inhabited earth are present here also,
7  and Jason has received them with hospitality. And all these [men] act in opposition to the decrees of Caesar, saying there is another king, Jesus.”
8  They indeed agitated the crowd and the city rulers when they heard these things; 
9  and first after taking sufficient security from Jason and the others they let them go.
10  Immediately by night the brothers sent both Paul and Silas out to Beroea, and these, upon arriving, went into the synagogue of the Jews.
11  Now the latter were more noble-minded than those in Thessalonica, for they received the word with the greatest eagerness of mind, carefully examining the Scriptures daily as to whether these things were so.
12  Therefore many of them became believers, and so did not a few of the reputable Greek women and of the men.
13  But when the Jews from Thessalonica learned that the word of God was published also in Beroea by Paul, they came there also to incite and agitate the masses.
14  Then the brothers immediately sent Paul off to go as far as the sea;  but both Silas and Timothy remained behind there.
15  However, those conducting Paul brought him as far as Athens and, after receiving a command for Silas and Timothy to come to him as quickly as possible, they departed.
16  Now while Paul was waiting for them in Athens, his spirit within him came to be irritated at beholding that the city was full of idols.
17  Consequently he began to reason in the synagogue with the Jews and the other people who worshiped [God] and every day in the marketplace with those who happened to be on hand.
18  But certain ones of both the Epicurean and the Stoic philosophers took to conversing with him controversially, and some would say: “What is it this chatterer would like to tell?” Others: “He seems to be a publisher of foreign deities.” This was because he was declaring the good news of Jesus and the resurrection.
19  So they laid hold of him and led him to the Areopagus, saying: “Can we get to know what this new teaching is which is spoken by you?
20  For you are introducing some things that are strange to our ears. Therefore we desire to get to know what these things purport to be.”
21  In fact, all Athenians and the foreigners sojourning there would spend their leisure time at nothing but telling something or listening to something new.
22  Paul now stood in the midst of the Areopagus and said: “Men of Athens, I behold that in all things YOU seem to be more given to the fear of the deities than others are.
23  For instance, while passing along and carefully observing YOUR objects of veneration I also found an altar on which had been inscribed ‘To an Unknown God.’ Therefore what YOU are unknowingly giving godly devotion to, this I am publishing to YOU.
24  The God that made the world and all the things in it, being, as this One is, Lord of heaven and earth, does not dwell in handmade temples,
25  neither is he attended to by human hands as if he needed anything, because he himself gives to all [persons] life and breath and all things.
26  And he made out of one [man] every nation of men, to dwell upon the entire surface of the earth, and he decreed the appointed times and the set limits of the dwelling of [men],
27  for them to seek God, if they might grope for him and really find him, although, in fact, he is not far off from each one of us.
28  For by him we have life and move and exist, even as certain ones of the poets among YOU have said, ‘For we are also his progeny.’
29  “Seeing, therefore, that we are the progeny of God, we ought not to imagine that the Divine Being is like gold or silver or stone, like something sculptured by the art and contrivance of man.
30  True, God has overlooked the times of such ignorance, yet now he is telling mankind that they should all everywhere repent.
31  Because he has set a day in which he purposes to judge the inhabited earth in righteousness by a man whom he has appointed, and he has furnished a guarantee to all men in that he has resurrected him from the dead.”
32  Well, when they heard of a resurrection of the dead, some began to mock, while others said: “We will hear you about this even another time.”
33  Thus Paul went out from their midst,
34  but some men joined themselves to him and became believers, among whom also were Dionysius, a judge of the court of the Areopagus, and a woman named Damaris, and others besides them.
acts 18
18  After these things he departed from Athens and came to Corinth.
2  And he found a certain Jew named Aquila, a native of Pontus who had recently come from Italy, and Priscilla his wife, because of the fact that Claudius had ordered all the Jews to depart from Rome. So he went to them
3  and on account of being of the same trade he stayed at their home, and they worked, for they were tentmakers by trade.
4  However, he would give a talk in the synagogue every sabbath and would persuade Jews and Greeks.
5  When, now, both Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul began to be intensely occupied with the word, witnessing to the Jews to prove that Jesus is the Christ.
6  But after they kept on opposing and speaking abusively, he shook out his garments and said to them: “Let YOUR blood be upon YOUR own heads. I am clean. From now on I will go to people of the nations.”
7  Accordingly he transferred from there and went into the house of a man named Titius Justus, a worshiper of God, whose house was adjoining the synagogue.
8  But Crispus the presiding officer of the synagogue became a believer in the Lord, and so did all his household. And many of the Corinthians that heard began to believe and be baptized.
9  Moreover, by night the Lord said to Paul through a vision: “Have no fear, but keep on speaking and do not keep silent,
10  because I am with you and no man will assault you so as to do you injury;  for I have many people in this city.”
11  So he stayed set there a year and six months, teaching among them the word of God.
12  Now while Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews rose up with one accord against Paul and led him to the judgment seat,
13  saying: “Contrary to the law this person leads men to another persuasion in worshiping God.”
14  But as Paul was going to open his mouth, Gallio said to the Jews: “If it were, indeed, some wrong or a wicked act of villainy, O Jews, I would with reason put up patiently with YOU.
15  But if it is controversies over speech and names and the law among YOU, YOU yourselves must see to it. I do not wish to be a judge of these things.”
16  With that he drove them away from the judgment seat.
17  So they all laid hold of Sosthenes the presiding officer of the synagogue and went to beating him in front of the judgment seat. But Gallio would not concern himself at all with these things.
18  However, after staying quite some days longer, Paul said good-bye to the brothers and proceeded to sail away for Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquila, as he had the hair of his head clipped short in Cenchreae, for he had a vow.
19  So they arrived at Ephesus, and he left them there;  but he himself entered into the synagogue and reasoned with the Jews.
20  Although they kept requesting him to remain for a longer time, he would not consent
21  but said good-bye and told them: “I will return to YOU again, if Jehovah is willing.” And he put out to sea from Ephesus
22  and came down to Caesarea. And he went up and greeted the congregation, and went down to Antioch.
23  And when he had passed some time there he departed and went from place to place through the country of Galatia and Phrygia, strengthening all the disciples.
24  Now a certain Jew named Apollos, a native of Alexandria, an eloquent man, arrived in Ephesus;  and he was well versed in the Scriptures.
25  This [man] had been orally instructed in the way of Jehovah and, as he was aglow with the spirit, he went speaking and teaching with correctness the things about Jesus, but being acquainted with only the baptism of John.
26  And this [man] started to speak boldly in the synagogue. When Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him into their company and expounded the way of God more correctly to him.
27  Further, because he was desiring to go across into Achaia, the brothers wrote the disciples, exhorting them to receive him kindly. So when he got there, he greatly helped those who had believed on account of [God’s] undeserved kindness; 
28  for with intensity he thoroughly proved the Jews to be wrong publicly, while he demonstrated by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.
acts 19
19  In the course of events, while Apollos was in Corinth, Paul went through the inland parts and came down to Ephesus, and found some disciples; 
2  and he said to them: “Did you receive holy spirit when YOU became believers?” They said to him: “Why, we have never heard whether there is a holy spirit.”
3  And he said: “In what, then, were YOU baptized?” They said: “In John’s baptism.”
4  Paul said: “John baptized with the baptism [in symbol] of repentance, telling the people to believe in the one coming after him, that is, in Jesus.”
5  On hearing this, they got baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
6  And when Paul laid his hands upon them, the holy spirit came upon them, and they began speaking with tongues and prophesying.
7  All together, there were about twelve men.
8  Entering into the synagogue, he spoke with boldness for three months, giving talks and using persuasion concerning the kingdom of God.
9  But when some went on hardening themselves and not believing, speaking injuriously about The Way before the multitude, he withdrew from them and separated the disciples from them, daily giving talks in the school [auditorium] of Tyrannus.
10  This took place for two years, so that all those inhabiting the [district of] Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks.
11  And God kept performing extraordinary works of power through the hands of Paul,
12  so that even cloths and aprons were borne from his body to the ailing people, and the diseases left them, and the wicked spirits came out.
13  But certain ones of the roving Jews who practiced the casting out of demons also undertook to name the name of the Lord Jesus over those having the wicked spirits, saying: “I solemnly charge YOU by Jesus whom Paul preaches.”
14  Now there were seven sons of a certain Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, doing this.
15  But in answer the wicked spirit said to them: “I know Jesus and I am acquainted with Paul;  but who are YOU?”
16  With that the man in whom the wicked spirit was leaped upon them, got the mastery of one after the other, and prevailed against them, so that they fled naked and wounded out of that house.
17  This became known to all, both the Jews and the Greeks that dwelt in Ephesus;  and a fear fell upon them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus went on being magnified.
18  And many of those who had become believers would come and confess and report their practices openly.
19  Indeed, quite a number of those who practiced magical arts brought their books together and burned them up before everybody. And they calculated together the prices of them and found them worth fifty thousand pieces of silver.
20  Thus in a mighty way the word of Jehovah kept growing and prevailing.
21  Now when these things had been completed, Paul purposed in his spirit that, after going through Macedonia and Achaia, he would journey to Jerusalem, saying: “After I get there I must also see Rome.”
22  So he dispatched to Macedonia two of those who ministered to him, Timothy and Erastus, but he himself delayed for some time in the [district of] Asia.
23  At that particular time there arose no little disturbance concerning The Way.
24  For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith, by making silver shrines of Artemis furnished the craftsmen no little gain; 
25  and he gathered them and those who worked at such things and said: “Men, YOU well know that from this business we have our prosperity.
26  Also, YOU behold and hear how not only in Ephesus but in nearly all the [district of] Asia this Paul has persuaded a considerable crowd and turned them to another opinion, saying that the ones that are made by hands are not gods.
27  Moreover, the danger exists not only that this occupation of ours will come into disrepute but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be esteemed as nothing and even her magnificence which the whole [district of] Asia and the inhabited earth worships is about to be brought down to nothing.”
28  Hearing this and becoming full of anger, the men began crying out, saying: “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!”
29  So the city became filled with confusion, and with one accord they rushed into the theater, taking forcibly along with them Gaius and Aristarchus, Macedonians, traveling companions of Paul.
30  For his part, Paul was willing to go inside to the people, but the disciples would not permit him.
31  Even some of the commissioners of festivals and games, who were friendly to him, sent to him and began pleading for him not to risk himself in the theater.
32  The fact is, some were crying out one thing and others another;  for the assembly was in confusion, and the majority of them did not know the reason why they had come together.
33  So together they brought Alexander out of the crowd, the Jews thrusting him up front;  and Alexander motioned with his hand and was wanting to make his defense to the people.
34  But when they recognized that he was a Jew, one cry arose from them all as they shouted for about two hours: “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!”
35  When, finally, the city recorder had quieted the crowd, he said: “Men of Ephesus, who really is there of mankind that does not know that the city of the Ephesians is the temple keeper of the great Artemis and of the image that fell from heaven?
36  Therefore since these things are indisputable, it is becoming for YOU to keep calm and not act rashly.
37  For YOU have brought these men who are neither robbers of temples nor blasphemers of our goddess.
38  Therefore if Demetrius and the craftsmen with him do have a case against someone, court days are held and there are proconsuls;  let them bring charges against one another.
39  If, though, YOU are searching for anything beyond that, it must be decided in a regular assembly.
40  For we are really in danger of being charged with sedition over today’s affair, no single cause existing that will permit us to render a reason for this disorderly mob.”
41  And when he had said these things, he dismissed the assembly.
acts 20
20  Now after the uproar had subsided, Paul sent for the disciples, and when he had encouraged them and bidden them farewell, he went forth to journey into Macedonia.
2  After going through those parts and encouraging the ones there with many a word, he came into Greece.
3  And when he had spent three months there, because a plot was hatched against him by the Jews as he was about to set sail for Syria, he made up his mind to return through Macedonia.
4  There were accompanying him Sopater the son of Pyrrhus of Beroea, Aristarchus and Secundus of the Thessalonians, and Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy, and from the [district of] Asia Tychicus and Trophimus.
5  These went on and were waiting for us in Troas; 
6  but we put out to sea from Philippi after the days of the unfermented cakes, and we came to them in Troas within five days;  and there we spent seven days.
7  On the first day of the week, when we were gathered together to have a meal, Paul began discoursing to them, as he was going to depart the next day;  and he prolonged his speech until midnight.
8  So there were quite a few lamps in the upper chamber where we were gathered together.
9  Seated at the window, a certain young man named Eutychus fell into a deep sleep while Paul kept talking on, and, collapsing in sleep, he fell down from the third story and was picked up dead.
10  But Paul went downstairs, threw himself upon him and embraced him and said: “STOP raising a clamor, for his soul is in him.”
11  He now went upstairs and began the meal and took food, and after conversing for quite a while, until daybreak, he at length departed.
12  So they took the boy away alive and were comforted beyond measure.
13  We now went ahead to the boat and set sail to Assos, where we were intending to take Paul aboard, for, after giving instructions to this effect, he himself was intending to go on foot.
14  So when he caught up with us in Assos, we took him aboard and went to Mitylene; 
15  and, sailing away from there the succeeding day, we arrived opposite Chios, but the next day we touched at Samos, and on the following day we arrived at Miletus.
16  For Paul had decided to sail past Ephesus, in order that he might not spend any time in the [district of] Asia;  for he was hastening to get to Jerusalem on the day of the [festival of] Pentecost if he possibly could.
17  However, from Miletus he sent to Ephesus and called for the older men of the congregation.
18  When they got to him he said to them: “YOU well know how from the first day that I stepped into the [district of] Asia I was with you the whole time,
19  slaving for the Lord with the greatest lowliness of mind and tears and trials that befell me by the plots of the Jews; 
20  while I did not hold back from telling YOU any of the things that were profitable nor from teaching YOU publicly and from house to house.
21  But I thoroughly bore witness both to Jews and to Greeks about repentance toward God and faith in our Lord Jesus.
22  And now, look! bound in the spirit, I am journeying to Jerusalem, although not knowing the things that will happen to me in it,
23  except that from city to city the holy spirit repeatedly bears witness to me as it says that bonds and tribulations are waiting for me.
24  Nevertheless, I do not make my soul of any account as dear to me, if only I may finish my course and the ministry that I received of the Lord Jesus, to bear thorough witness to the good news of the undeserved kindness of God.
25  “And now, look! I know that all of YOU among whom I went preaching the kingdom will see my face no more.
26  Hence I call YOU to witness this very day that I am clean from the blood of all men,
27  for I have not held back from telling YOU all the counsel of God.
28  Pay attention to yourselves and to all the flock, among which the holy spirit has appointed YOU overseers, to shepherd the congregation of God, which he purchased with the blood of his own [Son].
29  I know that after my going away oppressive wolves will enter in among YOU and will not treat the flock with tenderness,
30  and from among YOU yourselves men will rise and speak twisted things to draw away the disciples after themselves.
31  “Therefore keep awake, and bear in mind that for three years, night and day, I did not quit admonishing each one with tears.
32  And now I commit YOU to God and to the word of his undeserved kindness, which [word] can build YOU up and give YOU the inheritance among all the sanctified ones.
33  I have coveted no man’s silver or gold or apparel.
34  YOU yourselves know that these hands have attended to the needs of me and of those with me.
35  I have exhibited to YOU in all things that by thus laboring YOU must assist those who are weak, and must bear in mind the words of the Lord Jesus, when he himself said, ‘There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.’”
36  And when he had said these things, he kneeled down with all of them and prayed.
37  Indeed, quite a bit of weeping broke out among them all, and they fell upon Paul’s neck and tenderly kissed him,
38  because they were especially pained at the word he had spoken that they were going to behold his face no more. So they proceeded to conduct him to the boat.
acts 21
21  Now when we had torn ourselves away from them and put out to sea, we ran with a straight course and came to Cos, but on the next [day] to Rhodes, and from there to Patara.
2  And when we had found a boat that was crossing to Phoenicia, we went aboard and sailed away.
3  After coming in sight of the island of Cyprus we left it behind on the left side and sailed on to Syria, and landed at Tyre, for there the boat was to unload [its] cargo.
4  By a search we found the disciples and remained here seven days. But through the spirit they repeatedly told Paul not to set foot in Jerusalem.
5  So when we had completed the days, we went forth and started on our way;  but they all, together with the women and children, conducted us as far as outside the city. And kneeling down on the beach we had prayer
6  and said good-bye to one another, and we went up into the boat but they returned to their homes.
7  We then completed the voyage from Tyre and arrived at Ptolemais, and we greeted the brothers and stayed one day with them.
8  The next day we set out and arrived in Caesarea, and we entered into the house of Philip the evangelizer, who was one of the seven men, and we stayed with him.
9  This man had four daughters, virgins, that prophesied.
10  But while we were remaining quite a number of days, a certain prophet named Agabus came down from Judea,
11  and he came to us and took up the girdle of Paul, bound his own feet and hands and said: “Thus says the holy spirit, ‘The man to whom this girdle belongs the Jews will bind in this manner in Jerusalem and deliver into the hands of people of the nations.’”
12  Now when we heard this, both we and those of that place began entreating him not to go up to Jerusalem.
13  Then Paul answered: “What are YOU doing by weeping and making me weak at heart? Rest assured, I am ready not only to be bound but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.”
14  When he would not be dissuaded, we acquiesced with the words: “Let the will of Jehovah take place.”
15  Now after these days we prepared for the journey and began going up to Jerusalem.
16  But some of the disciples from Caesarea also went with us, to bring us to the man at whose home we were to be entertained, a certain Mnason of Cyprus, an early disciple.
17  When we got into Jerusalem, the brothers received us gladly.
18  But on the following [day] Paul went in with us to James;  and all the older men were present.
19  And he greeted them and began giving in detail an account of the things God did among the nations through his ministry.
20  After hearing this they began to glorify God, and they said to him: “You behold, brother, how many thousands of believers there are among the Jews;  and they are all zealous for the Law.
21  But they have heard it rumored about you that you have been teaching all the Jews among the nations an apostasy from Moses, telling them neither to circumcise their children nor to walk in the [solemn] customs.
22  What, then, is to be done about it? In any case they are going to hear you have arrived.
23  Therefore do this which we tell you: We have four men with a vow upon themselves.
24  Take these men along and cleanse yourself ceremonially with them and take care of their expenses, that they may have their heads shaved. And so everybody will know that there is nothing to the rumors they were told about you, but that you are walking orderly, you yourself also keeping the Law.
25  As for the believers from among the nations, we have sent out, rendering our decision that they should keep themselves from what is sacrificed to idols as well as from blood and what is strangled and from fornication.”
26  Then Paul took the men along the next day and cleansed himself ceremonially with them and went into the temple, to give notice of the days to be fulfilled for the ceremonial cleansing, until the offering should be presented for each one of them.
27  Now when the seven days were about to be concluded, the Jews from Asia on beholding him in the temple began to throw all the crowd into confusion, and they laid their hands upon him,
28  crying out: “Men of Israel, help! This is the man that teaches everybody everywhere against the people and the Law and this place and, what is more, he even brought Greeks into the temple and has defiled this holy place.”
29  For they had previously seen Trophimus the Ephesian in the city with him, but they were imagining Paul had brought him into the temple.
30  And the whole city was set in an uproar, and a running together of the people occurred;  and they laid hold of Paul and dragged him outside the temple. And immediately the doors were closed.
31  And while they were seeking to kill him, information came up to the commander of the band that all Jerusalem was in confusion; 
32  and he at once took soldiers and army officers and ran down to them. When they caught sight of the military commander and the soldiers, they quit beating Paul.
33  Then the military commander came near and took hold of him and gave command for him to be bound with two chains;  and he proceeded to inquire who he might be and what he had done.
34  But some in the crowd began shouting out one thing, and others another. So, being unable himself to learn anything certain because of the tumult, he commanded him to be brought to the soldiers’ quarters.
35  But when he got upon the stairs, the situation became such that he was being carried along by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd; 
36  for the multitude of the people kept following, crying out: “Take him away!”
37  And as he was about to be led into the soldiers’ quarters, Paul said to the military commander: “Am I allowed to say something to you?” He said: “Can you speak Greek?
38  Are you not really the Egyptian who before these days stirred up a sedition and led the four thousand dagger men out into the wilderness?”
39  Then Paul said: “I am, in fact, a Jew, of Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of no obscure city. So I beg you, permit me to speak to the people.”
40  After he gave permission, Paul, standing on the stairs, motioned with his hand to the people. When a great silence fell, he addressed them in the Hebrew language, saying:
acts 22
22  “Men, brothers and fathers, hear my defense to YOU now.”
2  (Well, when they heard he was addressing them in the Hebrew language, they kept all the more silent, and he said:)
3  “I am a Jew, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but educated in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, instructed according to the strictness of the ancestral Law, being zealous for God just as all of YOU are this day.
4  And I persecuted this Way to the death, binding and handing over to prisons both men and women,
5  as both the high priest and all the assembly of older men can bear me witness. From them I also procured letters to the brothers in Damascus, and I was on my way to bring also those who were there bound to Jerusalem to be punished.
6  “But as I was journeying and drawing close to Damascus, about midday, suddenly out of heaven a great light flashed all around me,
7  and I fell to the ground and heard a voice say to me, ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?’
8  I answered, ‘Who are you, Lord?’ And he said to me, ‘I am Jesus the Nazarene, whom you are persecuting.’
9  Now the men that were with me beheld, indeed, the light but did not hear the voice of the one speaking to me.
10  At that I said, ‘What shall I do, Lord?’ The Lord said to me, ‘Rise, go your way into Damascus, and there you will be told about everything it is appointed for you to do.’
11  But as I could not see anything for the glory of that light, I arrived in Damascus, being led by the hand of those who were with me.
12  “Now Ananias, a certain man reverent according to the Law, well reported on by all the Jews dwelling there,
13  came to me and, standing by me, he said to me, ‘Saul, brother, have your sight again!’ And I looked up at him that very hour.
14  He said, ‘The God of our forefathers has chosen you to come to know his will and to see the righteous One and to hear the voice of his mouth,
15  because you are to be a witness for him to all men of things you have seen and heard.
16  And now why are you delaying? Rise, get baptized and wash your sins away by your calling upon his name.’
17  “But when I had returned to Jerusalem and was praying in the temple, I fell into a trance
18  and saw him saying to me, ‘Hurry up and get out of Jerusalem quickly, because they will not agree to your witness concerning me.’
19  And I said, ‘Lord, they themselves well know that I used to imprison and flog in one synagogue after another those believing upon you; 
20  and when the blood of Stephen your witness was being spilled, I myself was also standing by and approving and guarding the outer garments of those doing away with him.’
21  And yet he said to me, ‘Get on your way, because I shall send you out to nations far off.’”
22  Now they kept listening to him down to this word, and they raised their voices, saying: “Take such a [man] away from the earth, for he was not fit to live!”
23  And because they were crying out and throwing their outer garments about and tossing dust into the air,
24  the military commander ordered him to be brought into the soldiers’ quarters and said he should be examined under scourging, that he might know fully for what cause they were shouting against him this way.
25  But when they had stretched him out for the whipping, Paul said to the army officer standing there: “Is it lawful for YOU men to scourge a man that is a Roman and uncondemned?”
26  Well, when the army officer heard this, he went to the military commander and made report, saying: “What are you intending to do? Why, this man is a Roman.”
27  So the military commander approached and said to him: “Tell me, Are you a Roman?” He said: “Yes.”
28  The military commander responded: “I purchased these rights as a citizen for a large sum [of money].” Paul said: “But I was even born [in them].”
29  Immediately, therefore, the men that were about to examine him with torture withdrew from him;  and the military commander became afraid on ascertaining that he was a Roman and that he had bound him.
30  So, the next day, as he desired to know for sure just why he was being accused by the Jews, he let him loose and commanded the chief priests and all the Sanhedrin to assemble. And he brought Paul down and stood him among them.
acts 23
23  Looking intently at the Sanhedrin Paul said: “Men, brothers, I have behaved before God with a perfectly clear conscience down to this day.”
2  At this the high priest Ananias ordered those standing by him to strike him on the mouth.
3  Then Paul said to him: “God is going to strike you, you whitewashed wall. Do you at one and the same time sit to judge me in accord with the Law and, transgressing the Law, command me to be struck?”
4  Those standing by said: “Are you reviling the high priest of God?”
5  And Paul said: “Brothers, I did not know he was high priest. For it is written, ‘You must not speak injuriously of a ruler of your people.’”
6  Now when Paul took note that the one part was of Sadducees but the other of Pharisees, he proceeded to cry out in the Sanhedrin: “Men, brothers, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees. Over the hope of resurrection of the dead I am being judged.”
7  Because he said this, a dissension arose between the Pharisees and Sadducees, and the multitude was split.
8  For Sadducees say there is neither resurrection nor angel nor spirit, but the Pharisees publicly declare them all.
9  So there broke out a loud screaming, and some of the scribes of the party of the Pharisees rose and began contending fiercely, saying: “We find nothing wrong in this man;  but if a spirit or an angel spoke to him,—.”
10  Now when the dissension grew great, the military commander became afraid that Paul would be pulled to pieces by them, and he commanded the force of soldiers to go down and snatch him from their midst and bring him into the soldiers’ quarters.
11  But the following night the Lord stood by him and said: “Be of good courage! For as you have been giving a thorough witness on the things about me in Jerusalem, so you must also bear witness in Rome.”
12  Now when it became day, the Jews formed a conspiracy and bound themselves with a curse, saying they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul.
13  There were more than forty men that formed this oath-bound conspiracy; 
14  and they went to the chief priests and the older men and said: “We have solemnly bound ourselves with a curse not to take a bite of food until we have killed Paul.
15  Now, therefore, YOU together with the Sanhedrin make it clear to the military commander why he should bring him down to YOU as though YOU intended to determine more accurately the matters involving him. But before he gets near we will be ready to do away with him.”
16  However, the son of Paul’s sister heard of their lying in wait, and he came and entered into the soldiers’ quarters and reported it to Paul.
17  So Paul called one of the army officers to him and said: “Lead this young man off to the military commander, for he has something to report to him.”
18  Therefore this man took him and led him to the military commander and said: “The prisoner Paul called me to him and requested me to lead this young man to you, as he has something to tell you.”
19  The military commander took him by the hand and withdrew and began inquiring privately: “What is it you have to report to me?”
20  He said: “The Jews have agreed to request you to bring Paul down to the Sanhedrin tomorrow as though intending to learn something more accurate about him.
21  Above all things, do not let them persuade you, for more than forty men of theirs are lying in wait for him, and they have bound themselves with a curse neither to eat nor to drink until they have done away with him;  and they are now ready, waiting for the promise from you.”
22  Therefore the military commander let the young man go after ordering him: “Do not blab to anyone that you have made these things clear to me.”
23  And he summoned a certain two of the army officers and said: “Get two hundred soldiers ready to march clear to Caesarea, also seventy horsemen and two hundred spearmen, at the third hour of the night.
24  Also, provide beasts of burden that they may have Paul ride and convey him safely to Felix the governor.”
25  And he wrote a letter having this form:
26  “Claudius Lysias to his excellency, Governor Felix: Greetings!
27  This man was seized by the Jews and was about to be done away with by them, but I came suddenly with a force of soldiers and rescued him, because I learned he was a Roman.
28  And wishing to ascertain the cause for which they were accusing him, I brought him down into their Sanhedrin.
29  I found him to be accused about questions of their Law, but not charged with a single thing deserving of death or bonds.
30  But because a plot that is to be laid against the man has been disclosed to me, I am at once sending him to you, and commanding the accusers to speak against him before you.”
31  Therefore these soldiers took Paul according to their orders and brought him by night to Antipatris.
32  The next day they permitted the horsemen to go on with him, and they returned to the soldiers’ quarters.
33  The [horsemen] entered into Caesarea and delivered the letter to the governor and also presented Paul to him.
34  So he read it and inquired from what province he was, and ascertained that he was from Cilicia.
35  “I shall give you a thorough hearing,” he said, “when your accusers arrive also.” And he commanded that he be kept under guard in the praetorian palace of Herod.
acts 24
24  Five days later the high priest Ananias came down with some older men and a public speaker, a certain Tertullus, and they gave information to the governor against Paul.
2  When he was called, Tertullus started accusing him, saying: “Seeing that we enjoy great peace through you and that reforms are taking place in this nation through your forethought,
3  at all times and also in all places we receive it, Your Excellency Felix, with the greatest thankfulness.
4  But that I may not hinder you any further, I beseech you to hear us briefly in your kindliness.
5  For we have found this man a pestilent fellow and stirring up seditions among all the Jews throughout the inhabited earth and a spearhead of the sect of the Nazarenes,
6  one who also tried to profane the temple and whom we seized.
7  ——
8  From him you yourself can by examination find out about all these things of which we are accusing him.”
9  With that the Jews also joined in the attack, asserting that these things were so.
10  And Paul, when the governor nodded to him to speak, answered: “Knowing well that this nation has had you as judge for many years, I readily speak in my defense the things about myself,
11  as you are in a position to find out that for me it has not been more than twelve days since I went up to worship in Jerusalem; 
12  and they found me neither in the temple arguing with anyone nor causing a mob to rush together, either in the synagogues or throughout the city.
13  Nor can they prove to you the things of which they are accusing me right now.
14  But I do admit this to you, that, according to the way that they call a ‘sect,’ in this manner I am rendering sacred service to the God of my forefathers, as I believe all the things set forth in the Law and written in the Prophets; 
15  and I have hope toward God, which hope these [men] themselves also entertain, that there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous.
16  In this respect, indeed, I am exercising myself continually to have a consciousness of committing no offense against God and men.
17  So after quite a number of years I arrived to bring gifts of mercy to my nation, and offerings.
18  While I was at these matters they found me ceremonially cleansed in the temple, but not with a crowd or with a tumult. But there were certain Jews from the [district of] Asia,
19  who ought to be present before you and to accuse me if they might have anything against me.
20  Or, let the [men] here say for themselves what wrong they found as I stood before the Sanhedrin,
21  except with respect to this one utterance which I cried out while standing among them, ‘Over the resurrection of the dead I am today being judged before YOU!’”
22  However, Felix, knowing quite accurately the matters concerning this Way, began to put the [men] off and said: “Whenever Lysias the military commander comes down, I shall decide upon these matters involving YOU.”
23  And he ordered the army officer that the man be kept and have some relaxation [of custody], and that he forbid no one of his people to wait upon him.
24  Some days later Felix arrived with Drusilla his wife, who was a Jewess, and he sent for Paul and listened to him on the belief in Christ Jesus.
25  But as he talked about righteousness and self-control and the judgment to come, Felix became frightened and answered: “For the present go your way, but when I get an opportune time I shall send for you again.”
26  At the same time, though, he was hoping for money to be given him by Paul. On that account he sent for him even more frequently and would converse with him.
27  But, when two years had elapsed, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus;  and because Felix desired to gain favor with the Jews, he left Paul bound.
acts 25
25  Therefore Festus, after entering upon the [government of the] province, went up three days later to Jerusalem from Caesarea; 
2  and the chief priests and the principal men of the Jews gave him information against Paul. So they began to entreat him,
3  asking for themselves as a favor against the [man] that he would send for him to come to Jerusalem, as they were laying an ambush to do away with him along the road.
4  However, Festus answered that Paul was to be kept in Caesarea and that he himself was about to depart shortly for there.
5  “Hence let those who are in power among YOU,” he said, “come down with me and accuse him, if there is anything out of the way about the man.”
6  So when he had spent not more than eight or ten days among them, he went down to Caesarea, and the next day he sat down on the judgment seat and commanded Paul to be brought in.
7  When he arrived, the Jews that had come down from Jerusalem stood round about him, leveling against him many and serious charges for which they were unable to show evidence.
8  But Paul said in defense: “Neither against the Law of the Jews nor against the temple nor against Caesar have I committed any sin.”
9  Festus, desiring to gain favor with the Jews, said in reply to Paul: “Do you wish to go up to Jerusalem and be judged there before me concerning these things?”
10  But Paul said: “I am standing before the judgment seat of Caesar, where I ought to be judged. I have done no wrong to the Jews, as you also are finding out quite well.
11  If, on the one hand, I am really a wrongdoer and have committed anything deserving of death, I do not beg off from dying;  if, on the other hand, none of those things exists of which these [men] accuse me, no man can hand me over to them as a favor. I appeal to Caesar!”
12  Then Festus, after speaking with the assembly of counselors, replied: “To Caesar you have appealed;  to Caesar you shall go.”
13  Now when some days had passed, Agrippa the king and Bernice arrived in Caesarea for a visit of courtesy to Festus.
14  So, as they were spending a number of days there, Festus laid before the king the matters respecting Paul, saying: “There is a certain man left prisoner by Felix,
15  and when I was in Jerusalem the chief priests and the older men of the Jews brought information about him, asking a judgment of condemnation against him.
16  But I replied to them that it is not Roman procedure to hand any man over as a favor before the accused man meets his accusers face to face and gets a chance to speak in his defense concerning the complaint.
17  Therefore when they got together here, I made no delay, but the next day I sat down on the judgment seat and commanded the man to be brought in.
18  Taking the stand, the accusers produced no charge of the wicked things I had supposed concerning him.
19  They simply had certain disputes with him concerning their own worship of the deity and concerning a certain Jesus who was dead but who Paul kept asserting was alive.
20  So, being perplexed as to the dispute over these matters, I proceeded to ask if he would like to go to Jerusalem and there be judged concerning these matters.
21  But when Paul appealed to be kept for the decision by the August One, I commanded him to be kept until I should send him on up to Caesar.”
22  Here Agrippa [said] to Festus: “I myself would also like to hear the man.” “Tomorrow,” he said, “you shall hear him.”
23  Therefore, on the next day, Agrippa and Bernice came with much pompous show and entered into the audience chamber together with military commanders as well as men of eminence in the city, and when Festus gave the command, Paul was brought in.
24  And Festus said: “King Agrippa and all YOU men who are present with us, YOU are beholding this man concerning whom all the multitude of the Jews together have applied to me both in Jerusalem and here, shouting that he ought not to live any longer.
25  But I perceived he had committed nothing deserving of death. So when this [man] himself appealed to the August One, I decided to send him.
26  But concerning him I have nothing certain to write to [my] Lord. Therefore I brought him forth before YOU, and especially before you, King Agrippa, in order that, after the judicial examination has taken place, I might get something to write.
27  For it seems unreasonable to me to send a prisoner and not also to signify the charges against him.”
acts 26
26  Agrippa said to Paul: “You are permitted to speak in behalf of yourself.” Then Paul stretched his hand out and proceeded to say in his defense:
2  “Concerning all the things of which I am accused by Jews, King Agrippa, I count myself happy that it is before you I am to make my defense this day,
3  especially as you are expert on all the customs as well as the controversies among Jews. Therefore I beg you to hear me patiently.
4  “Indeed, as to the manner of life from youth up that I led from [the] beginning among my nation and in Jerusalem, all the Jews
5  that have been previously acquainted with me from the first know, if they but wish to bear witness, that according to the strictest sect of our form of worship I lived a Pharisee.
6  And yet now for the hope of the promise that was made by God to our forefathers I stand called to judgment; 
7  whereas our twelve tribes are hoping to attain to the fulfillment of this promise by intensely rendering him sacred service night and day. Concerning this hope I am accused by Jews, O king.
8  “Why is it judged unbelievable among YOU men that God raises up the dead?
9  I, for one, really thought within myself I ought to commit many acts of opposition against the name of Jesus the Nazarene; 
10  which, in fact, I did in Jerusalem, and many of the holy ones I locked up in prisons, as I had received authority from the chief priests;  and when they were to be executed, I cast my vote against them.
11  And by punishing them many times in all the synagogues I tried to force them to make a recantation;  and since I was extremely mad against them, I went so far as to persecuting them even in outside cities.
12  “Amid these efforts as I was journeying to Damascus with authority and a commission from the chief priests,
13  I saw at midday on the road, O king, a light beyond the brilliance of the sun flash from heaven about me and about those journeying with me.
14  And when we had all fallen to the ground I heard a voice say to me in the Hebrew language, ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? To keep kicking against the goads makes it hard for you.’
15  But I said, ‘Who are you, Lord?’ And the Lord said, ‘I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.
16  Nevertheless, rise and stand on your feet. For to this end I have made myself visible to you, in order to choose you as an attendant and a witness both of things you have seen and things I shall make you see respecting me; 
17  while I deliver you from [this] people and from the nations, to whom I am sending you,
18  to open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light and from the authority of Satan to God, in order for them to receive forgiveness of sins and an inheritance among those sanctified by [their] faith in me.’
19  “Wherefore, King Agrippa, I did not become disobedient to the heavenly sight,
20  but both to those in Damascus first and to those in Jerusalem, and over all the country of Judea, and to the nations I went bringing the message that they should repent and turn to God by doing works that befit repentance.
21  On account of these things Jews seized me in the temple and attempted to slay me.
22  However, because I have obtained the help that is from God I continue to this day bearing witness to both small and great, but saying nothing except things the Prophets as well as Moses stated were going to take place,
23  that the Christ was to suffer and, as the first to be resurrected from the dead, he was going to publish light both to this people and to the nations.”
24  Now as he was saying these things in his defense, Festus said in a loud voice: “You are going mad, Paul! Great learning is driving you into madness!”
25  But Paul said: “I am not going mad, Your Excellency Festus, but I am uttering sayings of truth and of soundness of mind.
26  In reality, the king to whom I am speaking with freeness of speech well knows about these things;  for I am persuaded that not one of these things escapes his notice, for this thing has not been done in a corner.
27  Do you, King Agrippa, believe the Prophets? I know you believe.”
28  But Agrippa said to Paul: “In a short time you would persuade me to become a Christian.”
29  At this Paul said: “I could wish to God that whether in a short time or in a long time not only you but also all those who hear me today would become men such as I also am, with the exception of these bonds.”
30  And the king rose and so did the governor and Bernice and the men seated with them.
31  But as they withdrew they began talking with one another, saying: “This man practices nothing deserving death or bonds.”
32  Moreover, Agrippa said to Festus: “This man could have been released if he had not appealed to Caesar.”
acts 27
27  Now as it was decided for us to sail away to Italy, they proceeded to hand both Paul and certain other prisoners over to an army officer named Julius of the band of Augustus.
2  Going aboard a boat from Adramyttium that was about to sail to places along the coast of the [district of] Asia, we set sail, there being with us Aristarchus a Macedonian from Thessalonica.
3  And the next day we landed at Sidon, and Julius treated Paul with human kindness and permitted him to go to his friends and enjoy [their] care.
4  And putting out to sea from there we sailed under the [shelter of] Cyprus, because the winds were contrary; 
5  and we navigated through the open sea along Cilicia and Pamphylia and put into port at Myra in Lycia.
6  But there the army officer found a boat from Alexandria that was sailing for Italy, and he made us board it.
7  Then, after sailing on slowly quite a number of days and coming to Cnidus with difficulty, because the wind did not let us get on, we sailed under the [shelter of] Crete at Salmone,
8  and coasting along it with difficulty we came to a certain place called Fair Havens, near which was the city Lasea.
9  As considerable time had passed and by now it was hazardous to navigate because even the fast [of atonement day] had already passed by, Paul made a recommendation,
10  saying to them: “Men, I perceive that navigation is going to be with damage and great loss not only of the cargo and the boat but also of our souls.”
11  However, the army officer went heeding the pilot and the shipowner rather than the things said by Paul.
12  Now as the harbor was inconvenient for wintering, the majority advised setting sail from there, to see if they could somehow make it to Phoenix to winter, a harbor of Crete that opens toward the northeast and toward the southeast.
13  Moreover, when the south wind blew softly, they thought they had as good as realized their purpose, and they lifted anchor and began coasting inshore along Crete.
14  After no great while, however, a tempestuous wind called Euroaquilo rushed down upon it.
15  As the boat was violently seized and was not able to keep its head against the wind, we gave way and were borne along.
16  Now we ran under [the shelter of] a certain small island called Cauda, and yet we were hardly able to get possession of the skiff at the stern.
17  But after hoisting it aboard they began using helps to undergird the boat;  and being in fear of running aground on the Syrtis, they lowered the gear and thus were driven along.
18  Yet because we were being violently tossed with the tempest, the following [day] they began to lighten the ship; 
19  and the third [day], with their own hands, they threw away the tackling of the boat.
20  When, now, neither sun nor stars appeared for many days, and no little tempest was lying upon us, all hope of our being saved finally began to be cut off.
21  And when there had been a long abstinence from food, then Paul stood up in the midst of them and said: “Men, YOU certainly ought to have taken my advice and not have put out to sea from Crete and have sustained this damage and loss.
22  Still, now I recommend to YOU to be of good cheer, for not a soul of YOU will be lost, only the boat will.
23  For this night there stood near me an angel of the God to whom I belong and to whom I render sacred service,
24  saying, ‘Have no fear, Paul. You must stand before Caesar, and, look! God has freely given you all those sailing with you.’
25  Therefore be of good cheer, men;  for I believe God that it will be exactly as it has been told me.
26  However, we must be cast ashore on a certain island.”
27  Now as the fourteenth night fell and we were being tossed to and fro on the [sea of] Adria, at midnight the sailors began to suspect they were drawing near to some land.
28  And they sounded the depth and found it twenty fathoms;  so they proceeded a short distance and again made a sounding and found it fifteen fathoms.
29  And because of fearing we might be cast somewhere upon the rocks, they cast out four anchors from the stern and began wishing for it to become day.
30  But when the sailors began seeking to escape from the boat and lowered the skiff into the sea under the pretense of intending to let down anchors from the prow,
31  Paul said to the army officer and the soldiers: “Unless these men remain in the boat, YOU cannot be saved.”
32  Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the skiff and let it fall off.
33  Now close to the approach of day Paul began to encourage one and all to take some food, saying: “Today is the fourteenth day YOU have been on the watch and YOU are continuing without food, having taken nothing for yourselves.
34  Therefore I encourage YOU to take some food, for this is in the interest of YOUR safety;  for not a hair of the head of one of YOU will perish.”
35  After he said this, he also took a loaf, gave thanks to God before them all and broke it and started eating.
36  So they all became cheerful and themselves began taking some food.
37  Now, all together, we souls in the boat were two hundred and seventy-six.
38  When they had been satisfied with food, they proceeded to lighten the boat by throwing the wheat overboard into the sea.
39  Finally when it became day, they could not recognize the land but they were observing a certain bay with a beach, and on this they were determined, if they could, to beach the boat.
40  So, cutting away the anchors, they let them fall into the sea, at the same time loosing the lashings of the rudder oars and, after hoisting the foresail to the wind, they made for the beach.
41  When they lighted upon a shoal washed on each side by the sea, they ran the ship aground and the prow got stuck and stayed immovable, but the stern began to be violently broken to pieces.
42  At this it became the determination of the soldiers to kill the prisoners, that no one might swim away and escape.
43  But the army officer desired to bring Paul safely through and restrained them from their purpose. And he commanded those able to swim to cast themselves into the sea and make it to land first,
44  and the rest to do so, some upon planks and some upon certain things from the boat. And thus it came about that all were brought safely to land.
acts 28
28  And when we had made it to safety, then we learned that the island was called Malta.
2  And the foreign-speaking people showed us extraordinary human kindness, for they kindled a fire and received all of us helpfully because of the rain that was falling and because of the cold.
3  But when Paul collected a certain bundle of sticks and laid it upon the fire, a viper came out due to the heat and fastened itself on his hand.
4  When the foreign-speaking people caught sight of the venomous creature hanging from his hand, they began saying to one another: “Surely this man is a murderer, and although he made it to safety from the sea, vindictive justice did not permit him to keep on living.”
5  However, he shook the venomous creature off into the fire and suffered no harm.
6  But they were expecting he was going to swell up with inflammation or suddenly drop dead. After they waited for a long while and beheld nothing hurtful happen to him, they changed their mind and began saying he was a god.
7  Now in the neighborhood of that place the principal man of the island, named Publius, had lands;  and he received us hospitably and entertained us benevolently three days.
8  But it happened that the father of Publius was lying down distressed with fever and dysentery, and Paul went in to him and prayed, laid his hands upon him and healed him.
9  After this occurred, the rest of the people on the island who had sicknesses also began to come to him and be cured.
10  And they also honored us with many gifts and, when we were setting sail, they loaded us with things for our needs.
11  Three months later we set sail in a boat from Alexandria that had wintered in the island and with the figurehead “Sons of Zeus.”
12  And putting into port at Syracuse we remained three days,
13  from which place we went around and arrived at Rhegium. And a day later a south wind sprang up and we made it into Puteoli on the second day.
14  Here we found brothers and were entreated to remain with them seven days;  and in this way we came toward Rome.
15  And from there the brothers, when they heard the news about us, came to meet us as far as the Marketplace of Appius and Three Taverns and, upon catching sight of them, Paul thanked God and took courage.
16  When, finally, we entered into Rome, Paul was permitted to stay by himself with the soldier guarding him.
17  However, three days later he called together those who were the principal men of the Jews. When they had assembled, he proceeded to say to them: “Men, brothers, although I had done nothing contrary to the people or the customs of our forefathers, I was delivered over as a prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans.
18  And these, after making an examination, were desirous of releasing me, as there was no cause for death in me.
19  But when the Jews kept speaking against it, I was compelled to appeal to Caesar, but not as though I had anything of which to accuse my nation.
20  Really on this account I entreated to see and speak to YOU, for because of the hope of Israel this chain I have around me.”
21  They said to him: “Neither have we received letters concerning you from Judea, nor has anyone of the brothers that has arrived reported or spoken anything wicked about you.
22  But we think it proper to hear from you what your thoughts are, for truly as regards this sect it is known to us that everywhere it is spoken against.”
23  They now arranged for a day with him, and they came in greater numbers to him in his lodging place. And he explained the matter to them by bearing thorough witness concerning the kingdom of God and by using persuasion with them concerning Jesus from both the law of Moses and the Prophets, from morning till evening.
24  And some began to believe the things said;  others would not believe.
25  So, because they were at disagreement with one another, they began to depart, while Paul made this one comment: “The holy spirit aptly spoke through Isaiah the prophet to YOUR forefathers,
26  saying, ‘Go to this people and say: “By hearing, YOU will hear but by no means understand;  and, looking, YOU will look but by no means see.
27  For the heart of this people has grown unreceptive, and with their ears they have heard without response, and they have shut their eyes;  that they should never see with their eyes and hear with their ears and understand with their heart and turn back, and I should heal them.”’
28  Therefore let it be known to YOU that this, the means by which God saves, has been sent out to the nations;  they will certainly listen to it.”
29  ——
30  So he remained for an entire two years in his own hired house, and he would kindly receive all those who came in to him,
31  preaching the kingdom of God to them and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with the greatest freeness of speech, without hindrance.
romans 1
1  Paul, a slave of Jesus Christ and called to be an apostle, separated to God’s good news,
2  which he promised aforetime through his prophets in the holy Scriptures,
3  concerning his Son, who sprang from the seed of David according to the flesh,
4  but who with power was declared God’s Son according to the spirit of holiness by means of resurrection from the dead—yes, Jesus Christ our Lord,
5  through whom we received undeserved kindness and an apostleship in order that there might be obedience of faith among all the nations respecting his name,
6  among which [nations] YOU also are those called to belong to Jesus Christ—
7  to all those who are in Rome as God’s beloved ones, called to be holy ones: May YOU have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and [the] Lord Jesus Christ.
8  First of all, I give thanks to my God through Jesus Christ concerning all of YOU, because YOUR faith is talked about throughout the whole world.
9  For God, to whom I render sacred service with my spirit in connection with the good news about his Son, is my witness of how without ceasing I always make mention of YOU in my prayers,
10  begging that if at all possible I may now at last be prospered in the will of God so as to come to YOU.
11  For I am longing to see YOU, that I may impart some spiritual gift to YOU in order for YOU to be made firm; 
12  or, rather, that there may be an interchange of encouragement among YOU, by each one through the other’s faith, both YOURS and mine.
13  But I do not want YOU to fail to know, brothers, that I many times purposed to come to YOU, but I have been hindered until now, in order that I might acquire some fruitage also among YOU even as among the rest of the nations.
14  Both to Greeks and to Barbarians, both to wise and to senseless ones I am a debtor:
15  so there is eagerness on my part to declare the good news also to YOU there in Rome.
16  For I am not ashamed of the good news;  it is, in fact, God’s power for salvation to everyone having faith, to the Jew first and also to the Greek; 
17  for in it God’s righteousness is being revealed by reason of faith and toward faith, just as it is written: “But the righteous one—by means of faith he will live.”
18  For God’s wrath is being revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men who are suppressing the truth in an unrighteous way,
19  because what may be known about God is manifest among them, for God made it manifest to them.
20  For his invisible [qualities] are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship, so that they are inexcusable; 
21  because, although they knew God, they did not glorify him as God nor did they thank him, but they became empty-headed in their reasonings and their unintelligent heart became darkened.
22  Although asserting they were wise, they became foolish
23  and turned the glory of the incorruptible God into something like the image of corruptible man and of birds and four-footed creatures and creeping things.
24  Therefore God, in keeping with the desires of their hearts, gave them up to uncleanness, that their bodies might be dishonored among them,
25  even those who exchanged the truth of God for the lie and venerated and rendered sacred service to the creation rather than the One who created, who is blessed forever. Amen.
26  That is why God gave them up to disgraceful sexual appetites, for both their females changed the natural use of themselves into one contrary to nature; 
27  and likewise even the males left the natural use of the female and became violently inflamed in their lust toward one another, males with males, working what is obscene and receiving in themselves the full recompense, which was due for their error.
28  And just as they did not approve of holding God in accurate knowledge, God gave them up to a disapproved mental state, to do the things not fitting,
29  filled as they were with all unrighteousness, wickedness, covetousness, badness, being full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, malicious disposition, being whisperers,
30  backbiters, haters of God, insolent, haughty, self-assuming, inventors of injurious things, disobedient to parents,
31  without understanding, false to agreements, having no natural affection, merciless.
32  Although these know full well the righteous decree of God, that those practicing such things are deserving of death, they not only keep on doing them but also consent with those practicing them.
romans 2
2  Therefore you are inexcusable, O man, whoever you are, if you judge;  for in the thing in which you judge another, you condemn yourself, inasmuch as you that judge practice the same things.
2  Now we know that the judgment of God is, in accord with truth, against those who practice such things.
3  But do you have this idea, O man, while you judge those who practice such things and yet you do them, that you will escape the judgment of God?
4  Or do you despise the riches of his kindness and forbearance and long-suffering, because you do not know that the kindly [quality] of God is trying to lead you to repentance?
5  But according to your hardness and unrepentant heart you are storing up wrath for yourself on the day of wrath and of the revealing of God’s righteous judgment.
6  And he will render to each one according to his works:
7  everlasting life to those who are seeking glory and honor and incorruptibleness by endurance in work that is good; 
8  however, for those who are contentious and who disobey the truth but obey unrighteousness there will be wrath and anger,
9  tribulation and distress, upon the soul of every man who works what is injurious, of the Jew first and also of the Greek; 
10  but glory and honor and peace for everyone who works what is good, for the Jew first and also for the Greek.
11  For there is no partiality with God.
12  For instance, all those who sinned without law will also perish without law;  but all those who sinned under law will be judged by law.
13  For the hearers of law are not the ones righteous before God, but the doers of law will be declared righteous.
14  For whenever people of the nations that do not have law do by nature the things of the law, these people, although not having law, are a law to themselves.
15  They are the very ones who demonstrate the matter of the law to be written in their hearts, while their conscience is bearing witness with them and, between their own thoughts, they are being accused or even excused.
16  This will be in the day when God through Christ Jesus judges the secret things of mankind, according to the good news I declare.
17  If, now, you are a Jew in name and are resting upon law and taking pride in God,
18  and you know his will and approve of things that are excellent because you are orally instructed out of the Law; 
19  and you are persuaded that you are a guide of the blind, a light for those in darkness,
20  a corrector of the unreasonable ones, a teacher of babes, and having the framework of the knowledge and of the truth in the Law—
21  do you, however, the one teaching someone else, not teach yourself? You, the one preaching “Do not steal,” do you steal?
22  You, the one saying “Do not commit adultery,” do you commit adultery? You, the one expressing abhorrence of the idols, do you rob temples?
23  You, who take pride in law, do you by your transgressing of the Law dishonor God?
24  For “the name of God is being blasphemed on account of YOU people among the nations”;  just as it is written.
25  Circumcision is, in fact, of benefit only if you practice law;  but if you are a transgressor of law, your circumcision has become uncircumcision.
26  If, therefore, an uncircumcised person keeps the righteous requirements of the Law, his uncircumcision will be counted as circumcision, will it not?
27  And the uncircumcised [person] that is such by nature will, by carrying out the Law, judge you who with its written code and circumcision are a transgressor of law.
28  For he is not a Jew who is one on the outside, nor is circumcision that which is on the outside upon the flesh.
29  But he is a Jew who is one on the inside, and [his] circumcision is that of the heart by spirit, and not by a written code. The praise of that one comes, not from men, but from God.
romans 3
3  What, then, is the superiority of the Jew, or what is the benefit of the circumcision?
2  A great deal in every way. First of all, because they were entrusted with the sacred pronouncements of God.
3  What, then, [is the case]? If some did not express faith, will their lack of faith perhaps make the faithfulness of God without effect?
4  Never may that happen! But let God be found true, though every man be found a liar, even as it is written: “That you might be proved righteous in your words and might win when you are being judged.”
5  However, if our unrighteousness brings God’s righteousness to the fore, what shall we say? God is not unjust when he vents his wrath, is he? (I am speaking as a man does.)
6  Never may that happen! How, otherwise, will God judge the world?
7  Yet if by reason of my lie the truth of God has been made more prominent to his glory, why am I also yet being judged as a sinner?
8  And [why] not [say], just as it is falsely charged to us and just as some men state that we say: “Let us do the bad things that the good things may come”? The judgment against those [men] is in harmony with justice.
9  What then? Are we in a better position? Not at all! For above we have made the charge that Jews as well as Greeks are all under sin; 
10  just as it is written: “There is not a righteous [man], not even one; 
11  there is no one that has any insight, there is no one that seeks for God.
12  All [men] have deflected, all of them together have become worthless;  there is no one that does kindness, there is not so much as one.”
13  “Their throat is an opened grave, they have used deceit with their tongues.” “Poison of asps is behind their lips.”
14  “And their mouth is full of cursing and bitter expression.”
15  “Their feet are speedy to shed blood.”
16  “Ruin and misery are in their ways,
17  and they have not known the way of peace.”
18  “There is no fear of God before their eyes.”
19  Now we know that all the things the Law says it addresses to those under the Law, so that every mouth may be stopped and all the world may become liable to God for punishment.
20  Therefore by works of law no flesh will be declared righteous before him, for by law is the accurate knowledge of sin.
21  But now apart from law God’s righteousness has been made manifest, as it is borne witness to by the Law and the Prophets; 
22  yes, God’s righteousness through the faith in Jesus Christ, for all those having faith. For there is no distinction.
23  For all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God,
24  and it is as a free gift that they are being declared righteous by his undeserved kindness through the release by the ransom [paid] by Christ Jesus.
25  God set him forth as an offering for propitiation through faith in his blood. This was in order to exhibit his own righteousness, because he was forgiving the sins that occurred in the past while God was exercising forbearance; 
26  so as to exhibit his own righteousness in this present season, that he might be righteous even when declaring righteous the man that has faith in Jesus.
27  Where, then, is the boasting? It is shut out. Through what law? That of works? No indeed, but through the law of faith.
28  For we reckon that a man is declared righteous by faith apart from works of law.
29  Or is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also of people of the nations? Yes, of people of the nations also,
30  if truly God is one, who will declare circumcised people righteous as a result of faith and uncircumcised people righteous by means of their faith.
31  Do we, then, abolish law by means of our faith? Never may that happen! On the contrary, we establish law.
romans 4
4  That being so, what shall we say about Abraham our forefather according to the flesh?
2  If, for instance, Abraham were declared righteous as a result of works, he would have ground for boasting;  but not with God.
3  For what does the scripture say? “Abraham exercised faith in Jehovah, and it was counted to him as righteousness.”
4  Now to the man that works the pay is counted, not as an undeserved kindness, but as a debt.
5  On the other hand, to the man that does not work but puts faith in him who declares the ungodly one righteous, his faith is counted as righteousness.
6  Just as David also speaks of the happiness of the man to whom God counts righteousness apart from works:
7  “Happy are those whose lawless deeds have been pardoned and whose sins have been covered; 
8  happy is the man whose sin Jehovah will by no means take into account.”
9  Does this happiness, then, come upon circumcised people or also upon uncircumcised people? For we say: “His faith was counted to Abraham as righteousness.”
10  Under what circumstances, then, was it counted? When he was in circumcision or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.
11  And he received a sign, namely, circumcision, as a seal of the righteousness by the faith he had while in his uncircumcised state, that he might be the father of all those having faith while in uncircumcision, in order for righteousness to be counted to them; 
12  and a father of circumcised offspring, not only to those who adhere to circumcision, but also to those who walk orderly in the footsteps of that faith while in the uncircumcised state which our father Abraham had.
13  For it was not through law that Abraham or his seed had the promise that he should be heir of a world, but it was through the righteousness by faith.
14  For if those who adhere to law are heirs, faith has been made useless and the promise has been abolished.
15  In reality the Law produces wrath, but where there is no law, neither is there any transgression.
16  On this account it was as a result of faith, that it might be according to undeserved kindness, in order for the promise to be sure to all his seed, not only to that which adheres to the Law, but also to that which adheres to the faith of Abraham. (He is the father of us all,
17  just as it is written: “I have appointed you a father of many nations.”) This was in the sight of the One in whom he had faith, even of God, who makes the dead alive and calls the things that are not as though they were.
18  Although beyond hope, yet based on hope he had faith, that he might become the father of many nations in accord with what had been said: “So your seed will be.”
19  And, although he did not grow weak in faith, he considered his own body, now already deadened, as he was about one hundred years old, also the deadness of the womb of Sarah.
20  But because of the promise of God he did not waver in a lack of faith, but became powerful by his faith, giving God glory
21  and being fully convinced that what he had promised he was also able to do.
22  Hence “it was counted to him as righteousness.”
23  That “it was counted to him” was written, however, not for his sake only,
24  but also for the sake of us to whom it is destined to be counted, because we believe on him who raised Jesus our Lord up from the dead.
25  He was delivered up for the sake of our trespasses and was raised up for the sake of declaring us righteous.
romans 5
5  Therefore, now that we have been declared righteous as a result of faith, let us enjoy peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
2  through whom also we have gained our approach by faith into this undeserved kindness in which we now stand;  and let us exult, based on hope of the glory of God.
3  And not only that, but let us exult while in tribulations, since we know that tribulation produces endurance; 
4  endurance, in turn, an approved condition;  the approved condition, in turn, hope,
5  and the hope does not lead to disappointment;  because the love of God has been poured out into our hearts through the holy spirit, which was given us.
6  For, indeed, Christ, while we were yet weak, died for ungodly men at the appointed time.
7  For hardly will anyone die for a righteous [man];  indeed, for the good [man], perhaps, someone even dares to die.
8  But God recommends his own love to us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.
9  Much more, therefore, since we have been declared righteous now by his blood, shall we be saved through him from wrath.
10  For if, when we were enemies, we became reconciled to God through the death of his Son, much more, now that we have become reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.
11  And not only that, but we are also exulting in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received the reconciliation.
12  That is why, just as through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin, and thus death spread to all men because they had all sinned—.
13  For until the Law sin was in the world, but sin is not charged against anyone when there is no law.
14  Nevertheless, death ruled as king from Adam down to Moses, even over those who had not sinned after the likeness of the transgression by Adam, who bears a resemblance to him that was to come.
15  But it is not with the gift as it was with the trespass. For if by one man’s trespass many died, the undeserved kindness of God and his free gift with the undeserved kindness by the one man Jesus Christ abounded much more to many.
16  Also, it is not with the free gift as it was with the way things worked through the one [man] that sinned. For the judgment resulted from one trespass in condemnation, but the gift resulted from many trespasses in a declaration of righteousness.
17  For if by the trespass of the one [man] death ruled as king through that one, much more will those who receive the abundance of the undeserved kindness and of the free gift of righteousness rule as kings in life through the one [person], Jesus Christ.
18  So, then, as through one trespass the result to men of all sorts was condemnation, likewise also through one act of justification the result to men of all sorts is a declaring of them righteous for life.
19  For just as through the disobedience of the one man many were constituted sinners, likewise also through the obedience of the one [person] many will be constituted righteous.
20  Now the Law came in beside in order that trespassing might abound. But where sin abounded, undeserved kindness abounded still more.
21  To what end? That, just as sin ruled as king with death, likewise also undeserved kindness might rule as king through righteousness with everlasting life in view through Jesus Christ our Lord.
romans 6
6  Consequently, what shall we say? Shall we continue in sin, that undeserved kindness may abound?
2  Never may that happen! Seeing that we died with reference to sin, how shall we keep on living any longer in it?
3  Or do YOU not know that all of us who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death?
4  Therefore we were buried with him through our baptism into his death, in order that, just as Christ was raised up from the dead through the glory of the Father, we also should likewise walk in a newness of life.
5  For if we have become united with him in the likeness of his death, we shall certainly also be [united with him in the likeness] of his resurrection; 
6  because we know that our old personality was impaled with [him], that our sinful body might be made inactive, that we should no longer go on being slaves to sin.
7  For he who has died has been acquitted from [his] sin.
8  Moreover, if we have died with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him.
9  For we know that Christ, now that he has been raised up from the dead, dies no more;  death is master over him no more.
10  For [the death] that he died, he died with reference to sin once for all time;  but [the life] that he lives, he lives with reference to God.
11  Likewise also YOU: reckon yourselves to be dead indeed with reference to sin but living with reference to God by Christ Jesus.
12  Therefore do not let sin continue to rule as king in YOUR mortal bodies that YOU should obey their desires.
13  Neither go on presenting YOUR members to sin as weapons of unrighteousness, but present yourselves to God as those alive from the dead, also YOUR members to God as weapons of righteousness.
14  For sin must not be master over YOU, seeing that YOU are not under law but under undeserved kindness.
15  What follows? Shall we commit a sin because we are not under law but under undeserved kindness? Never may that happen!
16  Do YOU not know that if YOU keep presenting yourselves to anyone as slaves to obey him, YOU are slaves of him because YOU obey him, either of sin with death in view or of obedience with righteousness in view?
17  But thanks to God that YOU were the slaves of sin but YOU became obedient from the heart to that form of teaching to which YOU were handed over.
18  Yes, since YOU were set free from sin, YOU became slaves to righteousness.
19  I am speaking in human terms because of the weakness of YOUR flesh: for even as YOU presented YOUR members as slaves to uncleanness and lawlessness with lawlessness in view, so now present YOUR members as slaves to righteousness with holiness in view.
20  For when YOU were slaves of sin, YOU were free as to righteousness.
21  What, then, was the fruit that YOU used to have at that time? Things of which YOU are now ashamed. For the end of those things is death.
22  However, now, because YOU were set free from sin but became slaves to God, YOU are having YOUR fruit in the way of holiness, and the end everlasting life.
23  For the wages sin pays is death, but the gift God gives is everlasting life by Christ Jesus our Lord.
romans 7
7  Can it be that YOU do not know, brothers, (for I am speaking to those who know law,) that the Law is master over a man as long as he lives?
2  For instance, a married woman is bound by law to her husband while he is alive;  but if her husband dies, she is discharged from the law of her husband.
3  So, then, while her husband is living, she would be styled an adulteress if she became another man’s. But if her husband dies, she is free from his law, so that she is not an adulteress if she becomes another man’s.
4  So, my brothers, YOU also were made dead to the Law through the body of the Christ, that YOU might become another’s, the one’s who was raised up from the dead, that we should bear fruit to God.
5  For when we were in accord with the flesh, the sinful passions that were excited by the Law were at work in our members that we should bring forth fruit to death.
6  But now we have been discharged from the Law, because we have died to that by which we were being held fast, that we might be slaves in a new sense by the spirit, and not in the old sense by the written code.
7  What, then, shall we say? Is the Law sin? Never may that become so! Really I would not have come to know sin if it had not been for the Law;  and, for example, I would not have known covetousness if the Law had not said: “You must not covet.”
8  But sin, receiving an inducement through the commandment, worked out in me covetousness of every sort, for apart from law sin was dead.
9  In fact, I was once alive apart from law;  but when the commandment arrived, sin came to life again, but I died.
10  And the commandment which was to life, this I found to be to death.
11  For sin, receiving an inducement through the commandment, seduced me and killed me through it.
12  Wherefore, on its part, the Law is holy, and the commandment is holy and righteous and good.
13  Did, then, what is good become death to me? Never may that happen! But sin did, that it might be shown as sin working out death for me through that which is good;  that sin might become far more sinful through the commandment.
14  For we know that the Law is spiritual;  but I am fleshly, sold under sin.
15  For what I am working out I do not know. For what I wish, this I do not practice;  but what I hate is what I do.
16  However, if what I do not wish is what I do, I agree that the Law is fine.
17  But now the one working it out is no longer I, but sin that resides in me.
18  For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, there dwells nothing good;  for ability to wish is present with me, but ability to work out what is fine is not [present].
19  For the good that I wish I do not do, but the bad that I do not wish is what I practice.
20  If, now, what I do not wish is what I do, the one working it out is no longer I, but the sin dwelling in me.
21  I find, then, this law in my case: that when I wish to do what is right, what is bad is present with me.
22  I really delight in the law of God according to the man I am within,
23  but I behold in my members another law warring against the law of my mind and leading me captive to sin’s law that is in my members.
24  Miserable man that I am! Who will rescue me from the body undergoing this death?
25  Thanks to God through Jesus Christ our Lord! So, then, with [my] mind I myself am a slave to God’s law, but with [my] flesh to sin’s law.
romans 8
8  Therefore those in union with Christ Jesus have no condemnation.
2  For the law of that spirit which gives life in union with Christ Jesus has set you free from the law of sin and of death.
3  For, there being an incapability on the part of the Law, while it was weak through the flesh, God, by sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and concerning sin, condemned sin in the flesh,
4  that the righteous requirement of the Law might be fulfilled in us who walk, not in accord with the flesh, but in accord with the spirit.
5  For those who are in accord with the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh, but those in accord with the spirit on the things of the spirit.
6  For the minding of the flesh means death, but the minding of the spirit means life and peace; 
7  because the minding of the flesh means enmity with God, for it is not under subjection to the law of God, nor, in fact, can it be.
8  So those who are in harmony with the flesh cannot please God.
9  However, YOU are in harmony, not with the flesh, but with the spirit, if God’s spirit truly dwells in YOU. But if anyone does not have Christ’s spirit, this one does not belong to him.
10  But if Christ is in union with YOU, the body indeed is dead on account of sin, but the spirit is life on account of righteousness.
11  If, now, the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in YOU, he that raised up Christ Jesus from the dead will also make YOUR mortal bodies alive through his spirit that resides in YOU.
12  So, then, brothers, we are under obligation, not to the flesh to live in accord with the flesh; 
13  for if YOU live in accord with the flesh YOU are sure to die;  but if YOU put the practices of the body to death by the spirit, YOU will live.
14  For all who are led by God’s spirit, these are God’s sons.
15  For YOU did not receive a spirit of slavery causing fear again, but YOU received a spirit of adoption as sons, by which spirit we cry out: “Abba, Father!”
16  The spirit itself bears witness with our spirit that we are God’s children.
17  If, then, we are children, we are also heirs: heirs indeed of God, but joint heirs with Christ, provided we suffer together that we may also be glorified together.
18  Consequently I reckon that the sufferings of the present season do not amount to anything in comparison with the glory that is going to be revealed in us.
19  For the eager expectation of the creation is waiting for the revealing of the sons of God.
20  For the creation was subjected to futility, not by its own will but through him that subjected it, on the basis of hope
21  that the creation itself also will be set free from enslavement to corruption and have the glorious freedom of the children of God.
22  For we know that all creation keeps on groaning together and being in pain together until now.
23  Not only that, but we ourselves also who have the firstfruits, namely, the spirit, yes, we ourselves groan within ourselves, while we are earnestly waiting for adoption as sons, the release from our bodies by ransom.
24  For we were saved in [this] hope;  but hope that is seen is not hope, for when a man sees a thing, does he hope for it?
25  But if we hope for what we do not see, we keep on waiting for it with endurance.
26  In like manner the spirit also joins in with help for our weakness;  for the [problem of] what we should pray for as we need to we do not know, but the spirit itself pleads for us with groanings unuttered.
27  Yet he who searches the hearts knows what the meaning of the spirit is, because it is pleading in accord with God for holy ones.
28  Now we know that God makes all his works cooperate together for the good of those who love God, those who are the ones called according to his purpose; 
29  because those whom he gave his first recognition he also foreordained to be patterned after the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brothers.
30  Moreover, those whom he foreordained are the ones he also called;  and those whom he called are the ones he also declared to be righteous. Finally those whom he declared righteous are the ones he also glorified.
31  What, then, shall we say to these things? If God is for us, who will be against us?
32  He who did not even spare his own Son but delivered him up for us all, why will he not also with him kindly give us all other things?
33  Who will file accusation against God’s chosen ones? God is the One who declares [them] righteous.
34  Who is he that will condemn? Christ Jesus is the one who died, yes, rather the one who was raised up from the dead, who is on the right hand of God, who also pleads for us.
35  Who will separate us from the love of the Christ? Will tribulation or distress or persecution or hunger or nakedness or danger or sword?
36  Just as it is written: “For your sake we are being put to death all day long, we have been accounted as sheep for slaughtering.”
37  To the contrary, in all these things we are coming off completely victorious through him that loved us.
38  For I am convinced that neither death nor life nor angels nor governments nor things now here nor things to come nor powers
39  nor height nor depth nor any other creation will be able to separate us from God’s love that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
romans 9
9  I am telling the truth in Christ;  I am not lying, since my conscience bears witness with me in holy spirit,
2  that I have great grief and unceasing pain in my heart.
3  For I could wish that I myself were separated as the cursed one from the Christ in behalf of my brothers, my relatives according to the flesh,
4  who, as such, are Israelites, to whom belong the adoption as sons and the glory and the covenants and the giving of the Law and the sacred service and the promises; 
5  to whom the forefathers belong and from whom the Christ [sprang] according to the flesh: God, who is over all, [be] blessed forever. Amen.
6  However, it is not as though the word of God had failed. For not all who [spring] from Israel are really “Israel.”
7  Neither because they are Abraham’s seed are they all children, but: “What will be called ‘your seed’ will be through Isaac.”
8  That is, the children in the flesh are not really the children of God, but the children by the promise are counted as the seed.
9  For the word of promise was as follows: “At this time I will come and Sarah will have a son.”
10  Yet not that case alone, but also when Rebekah conceived twins from the one [man], Isaac our forefather:
11  for when they had not yet been born nor had practiced anything good or vile, in order that the purpose of God respecting the choosing might continue dependent, not upon works, but upon the One who calls,
12  it was said to her: “The older will be the slave of the younger.”
13  Just as it is written: “I loved Jacob, but Esau I hated.”
14  What shall we say, then? Is there injustice with God? Never may that become so!
15  For he says to Moses: “I will have mercy upon whomever I do have mercy, and I will show compassion to whomever I do show compassion.”
16  So, then, it depends, not upon the one wishing nor upon the one running, but upon God, who has mercy.
17  For the Scripture says to Pharaoh: “For this very cause I have let you remain, that in connection with you I may show my power, and that my name may be declared in all the earth.”
18  So, then, upon whom he wishes he has mercy, but whom he wishes he lets become obstinate.
19  You will therefore say to me: “Why does he yet find fault? For who has withstood his express will?”
20  O man, who, then, really are you to be answering back to God? Shall the thing molded say to him that molded it, “Why did you make me this way?”
21  What? Does not the potter have authority over the clay to make from the same lump one vessel for an honorable use, another for a dishonorable use?
22  If, now, God, although having the will to demonstrate his wrath and to make his power known, tolerated with much long-suffering vessels of wrath made fit for destruction,
23  in order that he might make known the riches of his glory upon vessels of mercy, which he prepared beforehand for glory,
24  namely, us, whom he called not only from among Jews but also from among nations, [what of it]?
25  It is as he says also in Hosea: “Those not my people I will call ‘my people,’ and her who was not beloved ‘beloved’; 
26  and in the place where it was said to them, ‘YOU are not my people,’ there they will be called ‘sons of the living God.’”
27  Moreover, Isaiah cries out concerning Israel: “Although the number of the sons of Israel may be as the sand of the sea, it is the remnant that will be saved.
28  For Jehovah will make an accounting on the earth, concluding it and cutting it short.”
29  Also, just as Isaiah had said aforetime: “Unless Jehovah of armies had left a seed to us, we should have become just like Sodom, and we should have been made just like Gomorrah.”
30  What shall we say, then? That people of the nations, although not pursuing righteousness, caught up with righteousness, the righteousness that results from faith; 
31  but Israel, although pursuing a law of righteousness, did not attain to the law.
32  For what reason? Because he pursued it, not by faith, but as by works. They stumbled on the “stone of stumbling”; 
33  as it is written: “Look! I am laying in Zion a stone of stumbling and a rock-mass of offense, but he that rests his faith on it will not come to disappointment.”
romans 10
10  Brothers, the goodwill of my heart and my supplication to God for them are, indeed, for their salvation.
2  For I bear them witness that they have a zeal for God;  but not according to accurate knowledge; 
3  for, because of not knowing the righteousness of God but seeking to establish their own, they did not subject themselves to the righteousness of God.
4  For Christ is the end of the Law, so that everyone exercising faith may have righteousness.
5  For Moses writes that the man that has done the righteousness of the Law will live by it.
6  But the righteousness resulting from faith speaks in this manner: “Do not say in your heart, ‘Who will ascend into heaven?’ that is, to bring Christ down; 
7  or, ‘Who will descend into the abyss?’ that is, to bring Christ up from the dead.”
8  But what does it say? “The word is near you, in your own mouth and in your own heart”;  that is, the “word” of faith, which we are preaching.
9  For if you publicly declare that ‘word in your own mouth,’ that Jesus is Lord, and exercise faith in your heart that God raised him up from the dead, you will be saved.
10  For with the heart one exercises faith for righteousness, but with the mouth one makes public declaration for salvation.
11  For the Scripture says: “None that rests his faith on him will be disappointed.”
12  For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek, for there is the same Lord over all, who is rich to all those calling upon him.
13  For “everyone who calls on the name of Jehovah will be saved.”
14  However, how will they call on him in whom they have not put faith? How, in turn, will they put faith in him of whom they have not heard? How, in turn, will they hear without someone to preach?
15  How, in turn, will they preach unless they have been sent forth? Just as it is written: “How comely are the feet of those who declare good news of good things!”
16  Nevertheless, they did not all obey the good news. For Isaiah says: “Jehovah, who put faith in the thing heard from us?”
17  So faith follows the thing heard. In turn the thing heard is through the word about Christ.
18  Nevertheless I ask, They did not fail to hear, did they? Why, in fact, “into all the earth their sound went out, and to the extremities of the inhabited earth their utterances.”
19  Nevertheless I ask, Israel did not fail to know, did they? First Moses says: “I will incite YOU people to jealousy through that which is not a nation;  I will incite YOU to violent anger through a stupid nation.”
20  But Isaiah becomes very bold and says: “I was found by those who were not seeking me;  I became manifest to those who were not asking for me.”
21  But as respects Israel he says: “All day long I have spread out my hands toward a people that is disobedient and talks back.”
romans 11
11  I ask, then, God did not reject his people, did he? Never may that happen! For I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.
2  God did not reject his people, whom he first recognized. Why, do YOU not know what the Scripture says in connection with Elijah, as he pleads with God against Israel?
3  “Jehovah, they have killed your prophets, they have dug up your altars, and I alone am left, and they are looking for my soul.”
4  Yet, what does the divine pronouncement say to him? “I have left seven thousand men over for myself, [men] who have not bent the knee to Baal.”
5  In this way, therefore, at the present season also a remnant has turned up according to a choosing due to undeserved kindness.
6  Now if it is by undeserved kindness, it is no longer due to works;  otherwise, the undeserved kindness no longer proves to be undeserved kindness.
7  What, then? The very thing Israel is earnestly seeking he did not obtain, but the ones chosen obtained it. The rest had their sensibilities blunted; 
8  just as it is written: “God has given them a spirit of deep sleep, eyes so as not to see and ears so as not to hear, down to this very day.”
9  Also, David says: “Let their table become for them a snare and a trap and a stumbling block and a retribution; 
10  let their eyes become darkened so as not to see, and always bow down their back.”
11  Therefore I ask, Did they stumble so that they fell completely? Never may that happen! But by their false step there is salvation to people of the nations, to incite them to jealousy.
12  Now if their false step means riches to the world, and their decrease means riches to people of the nations, how much more will the full number of them mean it!
13  Now I speak to YOU who are people of the nations. Forasmuch as I am, in reality, an apostle to the nations, I glorify my ministry,
14  if I may by any means incite [those who are] my own flesh to jealousy and save some from among them.
15  For if the casting of them away means reconciliation for the world, what will the receiving of them mean but life from the dead?
16  Further, if the [part taken as] firstfruits is holy, the lump is also;  and if the root is holy, the branches are also.
17  However, if some of the branches were broken off but you, although being a wild olive, were grafted in among them and became a sharer of the olive’s root of fatness,
18  do not be exulting over the branches. If, though, you are exulting over them, it is not you that bear the root, but the root [bears] you.
19  You will say, then: “Branches were broken off that I might be grafted in.”
20  All right! For [their] lack of faith they were broken off, but you are standing by faith. Quit having lofty ideas, but be in fear.
21  For if God did not spare the natural branches, neither will he spare you.
22  See, therefore, God’s kindness and severity. Toward those who fell there is severity, but toward you there is God’s kindness, provided you remain in his kindness;  otherwise, you also will be lopped off.
23  They also, if they do not remain in their lack of faith, will be grafted in;  for God is able to graft them in again.
24  For if you were cut out of the olive tree that is wild by nature and were grafted contrary to nature into the garden olive tree, how much rather will these who are natural be grafted into their own olive tree!
25  For I do not want YOU, brothers, to be ignorant of this sacred secret, in order for YOU not to be discreet in your own eyes: that a dulling of sensibilities has happened in part to Israel until the full number of people of the nations has come in,
26  and in this manner all Israel will be saved. Just as it is written: “The deliverer will come out of Zion and turn away ungodly practices from Jacob.
27  And this is the covenant on my part with them, when I take their sins away.”
28  True, with reference to the good news they are enemies for YOUR sakes, but with reference to [God’s] choosing they are beloved for the sake of their forefathers.
29  For the gifts and the calling of God are not things he will regret.
30  For just as YOU were once disobedient to God but have now been shown mercy because of their disobedience,
31  so also these now have been disobedient with mercy resulting to YOU, that they themselves also may now be shown mercy.
32  For God has shut them all up together in disobedience, that he might show all of them mercy.
33  O the depth of God’s riches and wisdom and knowledge! How unsearchable his judgments [are] and past tracing out his ways [are]!
34  For “who has come to know Jehovah’s mind, or who has become his counselor?”
35  Or, “Who has first given to him, so that it must be repaid to him?”
36  Because from him and by him and for him are all things. To him be the glory forever. Amen.
romans 12
12  Consequently I entreat YOU by the compassions of God, brothers, to present YOUR bodies a sacrifice living, holy, acceptable to God, a sacred service with YOUR power of reason.
2  And quit being fashioned after this system of things, but be transformed by making YOUR mind over, that YOU may prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.
3  For through the undeserved kindness given to me I tell everyone there among YOU not to think more of himself than it is necessary to think;  but to think so as to have a sound mind, each one as God has distributed to him a measure of faith.
4  For just as we have in one body many members, but the members do not all have the same function,
5  so we, although many, are one body in union with Christ, but members belonging individually to one another.
6  Since, then, we have gifts differing according to the undeserved kindness given to us, whether prophecy, [let us prophesy] according to the faith proportioned [to us]; 
7  or a ministry, [let us be] at this ministry;  or he that teaches, [let him be] at his teaching; 
8  or he that exhorts, [let him be] at his exhortation;  he that distributes, [let him do it] with liberality;  he that presides, [let him do it] in real earnest;  he that shows mercy, [let him do it] with cheerfulness.
9  Let [YOUR] love be without hypocrisy. Abhor what is wicked, cling to what is good.
10  In brotherly love have tender affection for one another. In showing honor to one another take the lead.
11  Do not loiter at YOUR business. Be aglow with the spirit. Slave for Jehovah.
12  Rejoice in the hope. Endure under tribulation. Persevere in prayer.
13  Share with the holy ones according to their needs. Follow the course of hospitality.
14  Keep on blessing those who persecute;  be blessing and do not be cursing.
15  Rejoice with people who rejoice;  weep with people who weep.
16  Be minded the same way toward others as to yourselves;  do not be minding lofty things, but be led along with the lowly things. Do not become discreet in YOUR own eyes.
17  Return evil for evil to no one. Provide fine things in the sight of all men.
18  If possible, as far as it depends upon YOU, be peaceable with all men.
19  Do not avenge yourselves, beloved, but yield place to the wrath;  for it is written: “Vengeance is mine;  I will repay, says Jehovah.”
20  But, “if your enemy is hungry, feed him;  if he is thirsty, give him something to drink;  for by doing this you will heap fiery coals upon his head.”
21  Do not let yourself be conquered by the evil, but keep conquering the evil with the good.
romans 13
13  Let every soul be in subjection to the superior authorities, for there is no authority except by God;  the existing authorities stand placed in their relative positions by God.
2  Therefore he who opposes the authority has taken a stand against the arrangement of God;  those who have taken a stand against it will receive judgment to themselves.
3  For those ruling are an object of fear, not to the good deed, but to the bad. Do you, then, want to have no fear of the authority? Keep doing good, and you will have praise from it; 
4  for it is God’s minister to you for your good. But if you are doing what is bad, be in fear: for it is not without purpose that it bears the sword;  for it is God’s minister, an avenger to express wrath upon the one practicing what is bad.
5  There is therefore compelling reason for YOU people to be in subjection, not only on account of that wrath but also on account of [YOUR] conscience.
6  For that is why YOU are also paying taxes;  for they are God’s public servants constantly serving this very purpose.
7  Render to all their dues, to him who [calls for] the tax, the tax;  to him who [calls for] the tribute, the tribute;  to him who [calls for] fear, such fear;  to him who [calls for] honor, such honor.
8  Do not YOU people be owing anybody a single thing, except to love one another;  for he that loves his fellowman has fulfilled [the] law.
9  For the [law code], “You must not commit adultery, You must not murder, You must not steal, You must not covet,” and whatever other commandment there is, is summed up in this word, namely, “You must love your neighbor as yourself.”
10  Love does not work evil to one’s neighbor;  therefore love is the law’s fulfillment.
11  [Do] this, too, because YOU people know the season, that it is already the hour for YOU to awake from sleep, for now our salvation is nearer than at the time when we became believers.
12  The night is well along;  the day has drawn near. Let us therefore put off the works belonging to darkness and let us put on the weapons of the light.
13  As in the daytime let us walk decently, not in revelries and drunken bouts, not in illicit intercourse and loose conduct, not in strife and jealousy.
14  But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and do not be planning ahead for the desires of the flesh.
romans 14
14  Welcome the [man] having weaknesses in [his] faith, but not to make decisions on inward questionings.
2  One [man] has faith to eat everything, but the [man] who is weak eats vegetables.
3  Let the one eating not look down on the one not eating, and let the one not eating not judge the one eating, for God has welcomed that one.
4  Who are you to judge the house servant of another? To his own master he stands or falls. Indeed, he will be made to stand, for Jehovah can make him stand.
5  One [man] judges one day as above another;  another [man] judges one day as all others;  let each [man] be fully convinced in his own mind.
6  He who observes the day observes it to Jehovah. Also, he who eats, eats to Jehovah, for he gives thanks to God;  and he who does not eat does not eat to Jehovah, and yet gives thanks to God.
7  None of us, in fact, lives with regard to himself only, and no one dies with regard to himself only; 
8  for both if we live, we live to Jehovah, and if we die, we die to Jehovah. Therefore both if we live and if we die, we belong to Jehovah.
9  For to this end Christ died and came to life again, that he might be Lord over both the dead and the living.
10  But why do you judge your brother? Or why do you also look down on your brother? For we shall all stand before the judgment seat of God; 
11  for it is written: “‘As I live,’ says Jehovah, ‘to me every knee will bend down, and every tongue will make open acknowledgment to God.’”
12  So, then, each of us will render an account for himself to God.
13  Therefore let us not be judging one another any longer, but rather make this YOUR decision, not to put before a brother a stumbling block or a cause for tripping.
14  I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus that nothing is defiled in itself;  only where a man considers something to be defiled, to him it is defiled.
15  For if because of food your brother is being grieved, you are no longer walking in accord with love. Do not by your food ruin that one for whom Christ died.
16  Do not, therefore, let the good YOU people do be spoken of with injury to YOU.
17  For the kingdom of God does not mean eating and drinking, but [means] righteousness and peace and joy with holy spirit.
18  For he who in this regard slaves for Christ is acceptable to God and has approval with men.
19  So, then, let us pursue the things making for peace and the things that are upbuilding to one another.
20  Stop tearing down the work of God just for the sake of food. True, all things are clean, but it is injurious to the man who with an occasion for stumbling eats.
21  It is well not to eat flesh or to drink wine or do anything over which your brother stumbles.
22  The faith that you have, have it in accord with yourself in the sight of God. Happy is the man that does not put himself on judgment by what he approves.
23  But if he has doubts, he is already condemned if he eats, because [he does] not [eat] out of faith. Indeed, everything that is not out of faith is sin.
romans 15
15  We, though, who are strong ought to bear the weaknesses of those not strong, and not to be pleasing ourselves.
2  Let each of us please [his] neighbor in what is good for [his] upbuilding.
3  For even the Christ did not please himself;  but just as it is written: “The reproaches of those who were reproaching you have fallen upon me.”
4  For all the things that were written aforetime were written for our instruction, that through our endurance and through the comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope.
5  Now may the God who supplies endurance and comfort grant YOU to have among yourselves the same mental attitude that Christ Jesus had,
6  that with one accord YOU may with one mouth glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
7  Therefore welcome one another, just as the Christ also welcomed us, with glory to God in view.
8  For I say that Christ actually became a minister of those who are circumcised in behalf of God’s truthfulness, so as to verify the promises He made to their forefathers,
9  and that the nations might glorify God for his mercy. Just as it is written: “That is why I will openly acknowledge you among the nations and to your name I will make melody.”
10  And again he says: “Be glad, YOU nations, with his people.”
11  And again: “Praise Jehovah, all YOU nations, and let all the peoples praise him.”
12  And again Isaiah says: “There will be the root of Jesse, and there will be one arising to rule nations;  on him nations will rest their hope.”
13  May the God who gives hope fill YOU with all joy and peace by YOUR believing, that YOU may abound in hope with power of holy spirit.
14  Now I myself also am persuaded about YOU, my brothers, that YOU yourselves are also full of goodness, as YOU have been filled with all knowledge, and that YOU can also admonish one another.
15  However, I am writing YOU the more outspokenly on some points, as if reminding YOU again, because of the undeserved kindness given to me from God
16  for me to be a public servant of Christ Jesus to the nations, engaging in the holy work of the good news of God, in order that the offering, namely, these nations, might prove to be acceptable, it being sanctified with holy spirit.
17  Therefore I have cause for exulting in Christ Jesus when it comes to things pertaining to God.
18  For I will not venture to tell one thing if it is not of those things which Christ worked through me for the nations to be obedient, by [my] word and deed,
19  with the power of signs and portents, with the power of holy spirit;  so that from Jerusalem and in a circuit as far as Illyricum I have thoroughly preached the good news about the Christ.
20  In this way, indeed, I made it my aim not to declare the good news where Christ had already been named, in order that I might not be building on another man’s foundation; 
21  but, just as it is written: “Those to whom no announcement has been made about him will see, and those who have not heard will understand.”
22  Therefore also I was many times hindered from getting to YOU.
23  But now that I no longer have [untouched] territory in these regions, and for some years having had a longing to get to YOU
24  whenever I am on my way to Spain, I hope, above all, when I am on the journey there, to get a look at YOU and to be escorted partway there by YOU after I have first in some measure been satisfied with your company.
25  But now I am about to journey to Jerusalem to minister to the holy ones.
26  For those in Macedonia and Achaia have been pleased to share up their things by a contribution to the poor of the holy ones in Jerusalem.
27  True, they have been pleased to do so, and yet they were debtors to them;  for if the nations have shared in their spiritual things, they also owe it to minister publicly to these with things for the fleshly body.
28  Hence after I have finished with this and have got this fruit securely to them, I shall depart by way of YOU for Spain.
29  Moreover, I know that when I do come to YOU I shall come with a full measure of blessing from Christ.
30  Now I exhort YOU, brothers, through our Lord Jesus Christ and through the love of the spirit, that YOU exert yourselves with me in prayers to God for me,
31  that I may be delivered from the unbelievers in Judea and that my ministry which is for Jerusalem may prove to be acceptable to the holy ones,
32  so that when I get to YOU with joy by God’s will I shall be refreshed together with YOU.
33  May the God who gives peace be with all of YOU. Amen.
romans 16
16  I recommend to YOU Phoebe our sister, who is a minister of the congregation that is in Cenchreae,
2  that YOU may welcome her in [the] Lord in a way worthy of the holy ones, and that YOU may assist her in any matter where she may need YOU, for she herself also proved to be a defender of many, yes, of me myself.
3  Give my greetings to Prisca and Aquila my fellow workers in Christ Jesus,
4  who have risked their own necks for my soul, to whom not only I but also all the congregations of the nations render thanks; 
5  and [greet] the congregation that is in their house. Greet my beloved Epaenetus, who is a firstfruits of Asia for Christ.
6  Greet Mary, who has performed many labors for YOU.
7  Greet Andronicus and Junias my relatives and my fellow captives, who are men of note among the apostles and who have been in union with Christ longer than I have.
8  Give my greetings to Ampliatus my beloved in [the] Lord.
9  Greet Urbanus our fellow worker in Christ, and my beloved Stachys.
10  Greet Apelles, the approved one in Christ. Greet those from the household of Aristobulus.
11  Greet Herodion my relative. Greet those from the household of Narcissus who are in [the] Lord.
12  Greet Tryphaena and Tryphosa, [women] who are working hard in [the] Lord. Greet Persis our beloved one, for she performed many labors in [the] Lord.
13  Greet Rufus the chosen one in [the] Lord, and his mother and mine.
14  Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers with them.
15  Greet Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the holy ones with them.
16  Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the congregations of the Christ greet YOU.
17  Now I exhort YOU, brothers, to keep your eye on those who cause divisions and occasions for stumbling contrary to the teaching that YOU have learned, and avoid them.
18  For men of that sort are slaves, not of our Lord Christ, but of their own bellies;  and by smooth talk and complimentary speech they seduce the hearts of guileless ones.
19  For YOUR obedience has come to the notice of all. I therefore rejoice over YOU. But I want YOU to be wise as to what is good, but innocent as to what is evil.
20  For his part, the God who gives peace will crush Satan under YOUR feet shortly. May the undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus be with YOU.
21  Timothy my fellow worker greets YOU, and so do Lucius and Jason and Sosipater my relatives.
22  I, Tertius, who have done the writing of this letter, greet YOU in [the] Lord.
23  Gaius, my host and that of all the congregation, greets YOU. Erastus the city steward greets YOU, and so does Quartus his brother.
24  ——
25  Now to him who can make YOU firm in accord with the good news I declare and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the sacred secret which has been kept in silence for long-lasting times
26  but has now been made manifest and has been made known through the prophetic scriptures among all the nations in accord with the command of the everlasting God to promote obedience by faith; 
27  to God, wise alone, be the glory through Jesus Christ forever. Amen.
1 corinthians 1
1  Paul, called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ through God’s will, and Sosthenes our brother
2  to the congregation of God that is in Corinth, to YOU who have been sanctified in union with Christ Jesus, called to be holy ones, together with all who everywhere are calling upon the name of our Lord, Jesus Christ, their Lord and ours:
3  May YOU have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and [the] Lord Jesus Christ.
4  I always thank God for YOU in view of the undeserved kindness of God given to YOU in Christ Jesus; 
5  that in everything YOU have been enriched in him, in full ability to speak and in full knowledge,
6  even as the witness about the Christ has been rendered firm among YOU,
7  so that YOU do not fall short in any gift at all, while YOU are eagerly waiting for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
8  He will also make YOU firm to the end, that YOU may be open to no accusation in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
9  God is faithful, by whom YOU were called into a sharing with his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
10  Now I exhort YOU, brothers, through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that YOU should all speak in agreement, and that there should not be divisions among YOU, but that YOU may be fitly united in the same mind and in the same line of thought.
11  For the disclosure was made to me about YOU, my brothers, by those of [the house of] Chloe, that dissensions exist among YOU.
12  What I mean is this, that each one of YOU says: “I belong to Paul,” “But I to Apollos,” “But I to Cephas,” “But I to Christ.”
13  The Christ exists divided. Paul was not impaled for YOU, was he? Or were YOU baptized in the name of Paul?
14  I am thankful I baptized none of YOU except Crispus and Gaius,
15  so that no one may say that YOU were baptized in my name.
16  Yes, I also baptized the household of Stephanas. As for the rest, I do not know whether I baptized anybody else.
17  For Christ dispatched me, not to go baptizing, but to go declaring the good news, not with wisdom of speech, that the torture stake of the Christ should not be made useless.
18  For the speech about the torture stake is foolishness to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is God’s power.
19  For it is written: “I will make the wisdom of the wise [men] perish, and the intelligence of the intellectual [men] I will shove aside.”
20  Where is the wise man? Where the scribe? Where the debater of this system of things? Did not God make the wisdom of the world foolish?
21  For since, in the wisdom of God, the world through its wisdom did not get to know God, God saw good through the foolishness of what is preached to save those believing.
22  For both the Jews ask for signs and the Greeks look for wisdom; 
23  but we preach Christ impaled, to the Jews a cause for stumbling but to the nations foolishness; 
24  however, to those who are the called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God.
25  Because a foolish thing of God is wiser than men, and a weak thing of God is stronger than men.
26  For YOU behold his calling of YOU, brothers, that not many wise in a fleshly way were called, not many powerful, not many of noble birth; 
27  but God chose the foolish things of the world, that he might put the wise men to shame;  and God chose the weak things of the world, that he might put the strong things to shame; 
28  and God chose the ignoble things of the world and the things looked down upon, the things that are not, that he might bring to nothing the things that are,
29  in order that no flesh might boast in the sight of God.
30  But it is due to him that YOU are in union with Christ Jesus, who has become to us wisdom from God, also righteousness and sanctification and release by ransom; 
31  that it may be just as it is written: “He that boasts, let him boast in Jehovah.”
1 corinthians 2
2  And so I, when I came to YOU, brothers, did not come with an extravagance of speech or of wisdom declaring the sacred secret of God to YOU.
2  For I decided not to know anything among YOU except Jesus Christ, and him impaled.
3  And I came to YOU in weakness and in fear and with much trembling; 
4  and my speech and what I preached were not with persuasive words of wisdom but with a demonstration of spirit and power,
5  that YOUR faith might be, not in men’s wisdom, but in God’s power.
6  Now we speak wisdom among those who are mature, but not the wisdom of this system of things nor that of the rulers of this system of things, who are to come to nothing.
7  But we speak God’s wisdom in a sacred secret, the hidden wisdom, which God foreordained before the systems of things for our glory.
8  This [wisdom] not one of the rulers of this system of things came to know, for if they had known [it] they would not have impaled the glorious Lord.
9  But just as it is written: “Eye has not seen and ear has not heard, neither have there been conceived in the heart of man the things that God has prepared for those who love him.”
10  For it is to us God has revealed them through his spirit, for the spirit searches into all things, even the deep things of God.
11  For who among men knows the things of a man except the spirit of man that is in him? So, too, no one has come to know the things of God, except the spirit of God.
12  Now we received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is from God, that we might know the things that have been kindly given us by God.
13  These things we also speak, not with words taught by human wisdom, but with those taught by [the] spirit, as we combine spiritual [matters] with spiritual [words].
14  But a physical man does not receive the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him;  and he cannot get to know [them], because they are examined spiritually.
15  However, the spiritual man examines indeed all things, but he himself is not examined by any man.
16  For “who has come to know the mind of Jehovah, that he may instruct him?” But we do have the mind of Christ.
1 corinthians 3
3  And so, brothers, I was not able to speak to YOU as to spiritual men, but as to fleshly men, as to babes in Christ.
2  I fed YOU milk, not something to eat, for YOU were not yet strong enough. In fact, neither are YOU strong enough now,
3  for YOU are yet fleshly. For whereas there are jealousy and strife among YOU, are YOU not fleshly and are YOU not walking as men do?
4  For when one says: “I belong to Paul,” but another says: “I to Apollos,” are YOU not simply men?
5  What, then, is Apollos? Yes, what is Paul? Ministers through whom YOU became believers, even as the Lord granted each one.
6  I planted, Apollos watered, but God kept making [it] grow; 
7  so that neither is he that plants anything nor is he that waters, but God who makes [it] grow.
8  Now he that plants and he that waters are one, but each [person] will receive his own reward according to his own labor.
9  For we are God’s fellow workers. YOU people are God’s field under cultivation, God’s building.
10  According to the undeserved kindness of God that was given to me, as a wise director of works I laid a foundation, but someone else is building on it. But let each one keep watching how he is building on it.
11  For no man can lay any other foundation than what is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
12  Now if anyone builds on the foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood materials, hay, stubble,
13  each one’s work will become manifest, for the day will show it up, because it will be revealed by means of fire;  and the fire itself will prove what sort of work each one’s is.
14  If anyone’s work that he has built on it remains, he will receive a reward; 
15  if anyone’s work is burned up, he will suffer loss, but he himself will be saved;  yet, if so, [it will be] as through fire.
16  Do YOU not know that YOU people are God’s temple, and that the spirit of God dwells in YOU?
17  If anyone destroys the temple of God, God will destroy him;  for the temple of God is holy, which [temple] YOU people are.
18  Let no one be seducing himself: If anyone among YOU thinks he is wise in this system of things, let him become a fool, that he may become wise.
19  For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God;  for it is written: “He catches the wise in their own cunning.”
20  And again: “Jehovah knows that the reasonings of the wise men are futile.”
21  Hence let no one be boasting in men;  for all things belong to YOU,
22  whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas or the world or life or death or things now here or things to come, all things belong to YOU; 
23  in turn YOU belong to Christ;  Christ, in turn, belongs to God.
1 corinthians 4
4  Let a man so appraise us as being subordinates of Christ and stewards of sacred secrets of God.
2  Besides, in this case, what is looked for in stewards is for a man to be found faithful.
3  Now to me it is a very trivial matter that I should be examined by YOU or by a human tribunal. Even I do not examine myself.
4  For I am not conscious of anything against myself. Yet by this I am not proved righteous, but he that examines me is Jehovah.
5  Hence do not judge anything before the due time, until the Lord comes, who will both bring the secret things of darkness to light and make the counsels of the hearts manifest, and then each one will have his praise come to him from God.
6  Now, brothers, these things I have transferred so as to apply to myself and Apollos for YOUR good, that in our case YOU may learn the [rule]: “Do not go beyond the things that are written,” in order that YOU may not be puffed up individually in favor of the one against the other.
7  For who makes you to differ from another? Indeed, what do you have that you did not receive? If, now, you did indeed receive [it], why do you boast as though you did not receive [it]?
8  YOU men already have YOUR fill, do YOU? YOU are rich already, are YOU? YOU have begun ruling as kings without us, have YOU? And I wish indeed that YOU had begun ruling as kings, that we also might rule with YOU as kings.
9  For it seems to me that God has put us the apostles last on exhibition as men appointed to death, because we have become a theatrical spectacle to the world, and to angels, and to men.
10  We are fools because of Christ, but YOU are discreet in Christ;  we are weak, but YOU are strong;  YOU are in good repute, but we are in dishonor.
11  Down to this very hour we continue to hunger and also to thirst and to be scantily clothed and to be knocked about and to be homeless
12  and to toil, working with our own hands. When being reviled, we bless;  when being persecuted, we bear up; 
13  when being defamed, we entreat;  we have become as the refuse of the world, the offscouring of all things, until now.
14  I am writing these things, not to shame YOU, but to admonish YOU as my beloved children.
15  For though YOU may have ten thousand tutors in Christ, [YOU] certainly [do] not [have] many fathers;  for in Christ Jesus I have become YOUR father through the good news.
16  I entreat YOU, therefore, become imitators of me.
17  That is why I am sending Timothy to YOU, as he is my beloved and faithful child in [the] Lord;  and he will put YOU in mind of my methods in connection with Christ Jesus, just as I am teaching everywhere in every congregation.
18  Some are puffed up as though I were in fact not coming to YOU.
19  But I will come to YOU shortly, if Jehovah wills, and I shall get to know, not the speech of those who are puffed up, but [their] power.
20  For the kingdom of God [lies] not in speech, but in power.
21  What do YOU want? Shall I come to YOU with a rod, or with love and mildness of spirit?
1 corinthians 5
5  Actually fornication is reported among YOU, and such fornication as is not even among the nations, that a wife a certain [man] has of [his] father.
2  And are YOU puffed up, and did YOU not rather mourn, in order that the man that committed this deed should be taken away from YOUR midst?
3  I for one, although absent in body but present in spirit, have certainly judged already, as if I were present, the man who has worked in such a way as this,
4  that in the name of our Lord Jesus, when YOU are gathered together, also my spirit with the power of our Lord Jesus,
5  YOU hand such a man over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, in order that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord.
6  YOUR [cause for] boasting is not fine. Do YOU not know that a little leaven ferments the whole lump?
7  Clear away the old leaven, that YOU may be a new lump, according as YOU are free from ferment. For, indeed, Christ our passover has been sacrificed.
8  Consequently let us keep the festival, not with old leaven, neither with leaven of badness and wickedness, but with unfermented cakes of sincerity and truth.
9  In my letter I wrote YOU to quit mixing in company with fornicators,
10  not [meaning] entirely with the fornicators of this world or the greedy persons and extortioners or idolaters. Otherwise, YOU would actually have to get out of the world.
11  But now I am writing YOU to quit mixing in company with anyone called a brother that is a fornicator or a greedy person or an idolater or a reviler or a drunkard or an extortioner, not even eating with such a man.
12  For what do I have to do with judging those outside? Do YOU not judge those inside,
13  while God judges those outside? “Remove the wicked [man] from among yourselves.”
1 corinthians 6
6  Does anyone of YOU that has a case against the other dare to go to court before unrighteous men, and not before the holy ones?
2  Or do YOU not know that the holy ones will judge the world? And if the world is to be judged by YOU, are YOU unfit to try very trivial matters?
3  Do YOU not know that we shall judge angels? Why, then, not matters of this life?
4  If, then, YOU do have matters of this life to be tried, is it the men looked down upon in the congregation that YOU put in as judges?
5  I am speaking to move YOU to shame. Is it true that there is not one wise man among YOU that will be able to judge between his brothers,
6  but brother goes to court with brother, and that before unbelievers?
7  Really, then, it means altogether a defeat for YOU that YOU are having lawsuits with one another. Why do YOU not rather let yourselves be wronged? Why do YOU not rather let yourselves be defrauded?
8  To the contrary, YOU wrong and defraud, and YOUR brothers at that.
9  What! Do YOU not know that unrighteous persons will not inherit God’s kingdom? Do not be misled. Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor men kept for unnatural purposes, nor men who lie with men,
10  nor thieves, nor greedy persons, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners will inherit God’s kingdom.
11  And yet that is what some of YOU were. But YOU have been washed clean, but YOU have been sanctified, but YOU have been declared righteous in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ and with the spirit of our God.
12  All things are lawful for me;  but not all things are advantageous. All things are lawful for me;  but I will not let myself be brought under authority by anything.
13  Foods for the belly, and the belly for foods;  but God will bring both it and them to nothing. Now the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord;  and the Lord is for the body.
14  But God both raised up the Lord and will raise us up out of [death] through his power.
15  Do YOU not know that YOUR bodies are members of Christ? Shall I, then, take the members of the Christ away and make them members of a harlot? Never may that happen!
16  What! Do YOU not know that he who is joined to a harlot is one body? For, “The two,” says he, “will be one flesh.”
17  But he who is joined to the Lord is one spirit.
18  Flee from fornication. Every other sin that a man may commit is outside his body, but he that practices fornication is sinning against his own body.
19  What! Do YOU not know that the body of YOU people is [the] temple of the holy spirit within YOU, which YOU have from God? Also, YOU do not belong to yourselves,
20  for YOU were bought with a price. By all means, glorify God in the body of YOU people.
1 corinthians 7
7  Now concerning the things about which YOU wrote, it is well for a man not to touch a woman; 
2  yet, because of prevalence of fornication, let each man have his own wife and each woman have her own husband.
3  Let the husband render to [his] wife her due;  but let the wife also do likewise to [her] husband.
4  The wife does not exercise authority over her own body, but her husband does;  likewise, also, the husband does not exercise authority over his own body, but his wife does.
5  Do not be depriving each other [of it], except by mutual consent for an appointed time, that YOU may devote time to prayer and may come together again, that Satan may not keep tempting YOU for YOUR lack of self-regulation.
6  However, I say this by way of concession, not in the way of a command.
7  But I wish all men were as I myself am. Nevertheless, each one has his own gift from God, one in this way, another in that way.
8  Now I say to the unmarried persons and the widows, it is well for them that they remain even as I am.
9  But if they do not have self-control, let them marry, for it is better to marry than to be inflamed [with passion].
10  To the married people I give instructions, yet not I but the Lord, that a wife should not depart from her husband; 
11  but if she should actually depart, let her remain unmarried or else make up again with her husband;  and a husband should not leave his wife.
12  But to the others I say, yes, I, not the Lord: If any brother has an unbelieving wife, and yet she is agreeable to dwelling with him, let him not leave her; 
13  and a woman who has an unbelieving husband, and yet he is agreeable to dwelling with her, let her not leave her husband.
14  For the unbelieving husband is sanctified in relation to [his] wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified in relation to the brother;  otherwise, YOUR children would really be unclean, but now they are holy.
15  But if the unbelieving one proceeds to depart, let him depart;  a brother or a sister is not in servitude under such circumstances, but God has called YOU to peace.
16  For, wife, how do you know but that you will save [your] husband? Or, husband, how do you know but that you will save [your] wife?
17  Only, as Jehovah has given each one a portion, let each one so walk as God has called him. And thus I ordain in all the congregations.
18  Was any man called circumcised? Let him not become uncircumcised. Has any man been called in uncircumcision? Let him not get circumcised.
19  Circumcision does not mean a thing, and uncircumcision means not a thing, but observance of God’s commandments [does].
20  In whatever state each one was called, let him remain in it.
21  Were you called when a slave? Do not let it worry you;  but if you can also become free, rather seize the opportunity.
22  For anyone in [the] Lord that was called when a slave is the Lord’s freedman;  likewise he that was called when a freeman is a slave of Christ.
23  YOU were bought with a price;  stop becoming slaves of men.
24  In whatever condition each one was called, brothers, let him remain in it associated with God.
25  Now concerning virgins I have no command from the Lord, but I give my opinion as one who had mercy shown him by the Lord to be faithful.
26  Therefore I think this to be well in view of the necessity here with us, that it is well for a man to continue as he is.
27  Are you bound to a wife? Stop seeking a release. Are you loosed from a wife? Stop seeking a wife.
28  But even if you did marry, you would commit no sin. And if a virgin [person] married, such one would commit no sin. However, those who do will have tribulation in their flesh. But I am sparing YOU.
29  Moreover, this I say, brothers, the time left is reduced. Henceforth let those who have wives be as though they had none,
30  and also those who weep be as those who do not weep, and those who rejoice as those who do not rejoice, and those who buy as those not possessing,
31  and those making use of the world as those not using it to the full;  for the scene of this world is changing.
32  Indeed, I want YOU to be free from anxiety. The unmarried man is anxious for the things of the Lord, how he may gain the Lord’s approval.
33  But the married man is anxious for the things of the world, how he may gain the approval of his wife,
34  and he is divided. Further, the unmarried woman, and the virgin, is anxious for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in her body and in her spirit. However, the married woman is anxious for the things of the world, how she may gain the approval of her husband.
35  But this I am saying for YOUR personal advantage, not that I may cast a noose upon YOU, but to move YOU to that which is becoming and that which means constant attendance upon the Lord without distraction.
36  But if anyone thinks he is behaving improperly toward his virginity, if that is past the bloom of youth, and this is the way it should take place, let him do what he wants;  he does not sin. Let them marry.
37  But if anyone stands settled in his heart, having no necessity, but has authority over his own will and has made this decision in his own heart, to keep his own virginity, he will do well.
38  Consequently he also that gives his virginity in marriage does well, but he that does not give it in marriage will do better.
39  A wife is bound during all the time her husband is alive. But if her husband should fall asleep [in death], she is free to be married to whom she wants, only in [the] Lord.
40  But she is happier if she remains as she is, according to my opinion. I certainly think I also have God’s spirit.
1 corinthians 8
8  Now concerning foods offered to idols: we know we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.
2  If anyone thinks he has acquired knowledge of something, he does not yet know [it] just as he ought to know [it].
3  But if anyone loves God, this one is known by him.
4  Now concerning the eating of foods offered to idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world, and that there is no God but one.
5  For even though there are those who are called “gods,” whether in heaven or on earth, just as there are many “gods” and many “lords,”
6  there is actually to us one God the Father, out of whom all things are, and we for him;  and there is one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom all things are, and we through him.
7  Nevertheless, there is not this knowledge in all persons;  but some, being accustomed until now to the idol, eat food as something sacrificed to an idol, and their conscience, being weak, is defiled.
8  But food will not commend us to God;  if we do not eat, we do not fall short, and, if we eat, we have no credit to ourselves.
9  But keep watching that this authority of YOURS does not somehow become a stumbling block to those who are weak.
10  For if anyone should see you, the one having knowledge, reclining at a meal in an idol temple, will not the conscience of that one who is weak be built up to the point of eating foods offered to idols?
11  Really, by your knowledge, the man that is weak is being ruined, [your] brother for whose sake Christ died.
12  But when YOU people thus sin against YOUR brothers and wound their conscience that is weak, YOU are sinning against Christ.
13  Therefore, if food makes my brother stumble, I will never again eat flesh at all, that I may not make my brother stumble.
1 corinthians 9
9  Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? Are not YOU my work in [the] Lord?
2  If I am not an apostle to others, I most certainly am to YOU, for YOU are the seal confirming my apostleship in relation to [the] Lord.
3  My defense to those who examine me is as follows:
4  We have authority to eat and drink, do we not?
5  We have authority to lead about a sister as a wife, even as the rest of the apostles and the Lord’s brothers and Cephas, do we not?
6  Or is it only Barnabas and I that do not have authority to refrain from [secular] work?
7  Who is it that ever serves as a soldier at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat of its fruit? Or who shepherds a flock and does not eat some of the milk of the flock?
8  Am I speaking these things by human standards? Or does not the Law also say these things?
9  For in the law of Moses it is written: “You must not muzzle a bull when it is threshing out the grain.” Is it bulls God is caring for?
10  Or is it altogether for our sakes he says it? Really for our sakes it was written, because the man who plows ought to plow in hope and the man who threshes ought to do so in hope of being a partaker.
11  If we have sown spiritual things to YOU, is it something great if we shall reap things for the flesh from YOU?
12  If other men partake of this authority over YOU, do we not much more so? Nevertheless, we have not made use of this authority, but we are bearing all things, in order that we might not offer any hindrance to the good news about the Christ.
13  Do YOU not know that the men performing sacred duties eat the things of the temple, and those constantly attending at the altar have a portion for themselves with the altar?
14  In this way, too, the Lord ordained for those proclaiming the good news to live by means of the good news.
15  But I have not made use of a single one of these [provisions]. Indeed, I have not written these things that it should become so in my case, for it would be finer for me to die than—no man is going to make my reason for boasting void!
16  If, now, I am declaring the good news, it is no reason for me to boast, for necessity is laid upon me. Really, woe is me if I did not declare the good news!
17  If I perform this willingly, I have a reward;  but if I do it against my will, all the same I have a stewardship entrusted to me.
18  What, then, is my reward? That while declaring the good news I may furnish the good news without cost, to the end that I may not abuse my authority in the good news.
19  For, though I am free from all persons, I have made myself the slave to all, that I may gain the most persons.
20  And so to the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain Jews;  to those under law I became as under law, though I myself am not under law, that I might gain those under law.
21  To those without law I became as without law, although I am not without law toward God but under law toward Christ, that I might gain those without law.
22  To the weak I became weak, that I might gain the weak. I have become all things to people of all sorts, that I might by all means save some.
23  But I do all things for the sake of the good news, that I may become a sharer of it with [others].
24  Do YOU not know that the runners in a race all run, but only one receives the prize? Run in such a way that YOU may attain it.
25  Moreover, every man taking part in a contest exercises self-control in all things. Now they, of course, do it that they may get a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible one.
26  Therefore, the way I am running is not uncertainly;  the way I am directing my blows is so as not to be striking the air; 
27  but I pummel my body and lead it as a slave, that, after I have preached to others, I myself should not become disapproved somehow.
1 corinthians 10
10  Now I do not want YOU to be ignorant, brothers, that our forefathers were all under the cloud and all passed through the sea
2  and all got baptized into Moses by means of the cloud and of the sea; 
3  and all ate the same spiritual food
4  and all drank the same spiritual drink. For they used to drink from the spiritual rock-mass that followed them, and that rock-mass meant the Christ.
5  Nevertheless, on most of them God did not express his approval, for they were laid low in the wilderness.
6  Now these things became our examples, for us not to be persons desiring injurious things, even as they desired them.
7  Neither become idolaters, as some of them did;  just as it is written: “The people sat down to eat and drink, and they got up to have a good time.”
8  Neither let us practice fornication, as some of them committed fornication, only to fall, twenty-three thousand [of them] in one day.
9  Neither let us put Jehovah to the test, as some of them put [him] to the test, only to perish by the serpents.
10  Neither be murmurers, just as some of them murmured, only to perish by the destroyer.
11  Now these things went on befalling them as examples, and they were written for a warning to us upon whom the ends of the systems of things have arrived.
12  Consequently let him that thinks he is standing beware that he does not fall.
13  No temptation has taken YOU except what is common to men. But God is faithful, and he will not let YOU be tempted beyond what YOU can bear, but along with the temptation he will also make the way out in order for YOU to be able to endure it.
14  Therefore, my beloved ones, flee from idolatry.
15  I speak as to men with discernment;  judge for yourselves what I say.
16  The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not a sharing in the blood of the Christ? The loaf which we break, is it not a sharing in the body of the Christ?
17  Because there is one loaf, we, although many, are one body, for we are all partaking of that one loaf.
18  LOOK at that which is Israel in a fleshly way: Are not those who eat the sacrifices sharers with the altar?
19  What, then, am I to say? That what is sacrificed to an idol is anything, or that an idol is anything?
20  No;  but I say that the things which the nations sacrifice they sacrifice to demons, and not to God;  and I do not want YOU to become sharers with the demons.
21  YOU cannot be drinking the cup of Jehovah and the cup of demons;  YOU cannot be partaking of “the table of Jehovah” and the table of demons.
22  Or “are we inciting Jehovah to jealousy”? We are not stronger than he is, are we?
23  All things are lawful;  but not all things are advantageous. All things are lawful;  but not all things build up.
24  Let each one keep seeking, not his own [advantage], but that of the other person.
25  Everything that is sold in a meat market keep eating, making no inquiry on account of YOUR conscience; 
26  for “to Jehovah belong the earth and that which fills it.”
27  If anyone of the unbelievers invites YOU and YOU wish to go, proceed to eat everything that is set before YOU, making no inquiry on account of YOUR conscience.
28  But if anyone should say to YOU: “This is something offered in sacrifice,” do not eat on account of the one that disclosed it and on account of conscience.
29  “Conscience,” I say, not your own, but that of the other person. For why should it be that my freedom is judged by another person’s conscience?
30  If I am partaking with thanks, why am I to be spoken of abusively over that for which I give thanks?
31  Therefore, whether YOU are eating or drinking or doing anything else, do all things for God’s glory.
32  Keep from becoming causes for stumbling to Jews as well as Greeks and to the congregation of God,
33  even as I am pleasing all people in all things, not seeking my own advantage but that of the many, in order that they might get saved.
1 corinthians 11
11  Become imitators of me, even as I am of Christ.
2  Now I commend YOU because in all things YOU have me in mind and YOU are holding fast the traditions just as I handed [them] on to YOU.
3  But I want YOU to know that the head of every man is the Christ;  in turn the head of a woman is the man;  in turn the head of the Christ is God.
4  Every man that prays or prophesies having something on his head shames his head; 
5  but every woman that prays or prophesies with her head uncovered shames her head, for it is one and the same as if she were a [woman] with a shaved head.
6  For if a woman does not cover herself, let her also be shorn;  but if it is disgraceful for a woman to be shorn or shaved, let her be covered.
7  For a man ought not to have his head covered, as he is God’s image and glory;  but the woman is man’s glory.
8  For man is not out of woman, but woman out of man; 
9  and, what is more, man was not created for the sake of the woman, but woman for the sake of the man.
10  That is why the woman ought to have a sign of authority upon her head because of the angels.
11  Besides, in connection with [the] Lord neither is woman without man nor man without woman.
12  For just as the woman is out of the man, so also the man is through the woman;  but all things are out of God.
13  Judge for YOUR own selves: Is it fitting for a woman to pray uncovered to God?
14  Does not nature itself teach YOU that if a man has long hair, it is a dishonor to him; 
15  but if a woman has long hair, it is a glory to her? Because her hair is given her instead of a headdress.
16  However, if any man seems to dispute for some other custom, we have no other, neither do the congregations of God.
17  But, while giving these instructions, I do not commend YOU because it is, not for the better, but for the worse that YOU meet together.
18  For first of all, when YOU come together in a congregation, I hear divisions exist among YOU;  and in some measure I believe it.
19  For there must also be sects among YOU, that the persons approved may also become manifest among YOU.
20  Therefore, when YOU come together to one place, it is not possible to eat the Lord’s evening meal.
21  For, when YOU eat [it], each one takes his own evening meal beforehand, so that one is hungry but another is intoxicated.
22  Certainly YOU do have houses for eating and drinking, do YOU not? Or do YOU despise the congregation of God and make those who have nothing ashamed? What shall I say to YOU? Shall I commend YOU? In this I do not commend YOU.
23  For I received from the Lord that which I also handed on to YOU, that the Lord Jesus in the night in which he was going to be handed over took a loaf
24  and, after giving thanks, he broke it and said: “This means my body which is in YOUR behalf. Keep doing this in remembrance of me.”
25  He did likewise respecting the cup also, after he had the evening meal, saying: “This cup means the new covenant by virtue of my blood. Keep doing this, as often as YOU drink it, in remembrance of me.”
26  For as often as YOU eat this loaf and drink this cup, YOU keep proclaiming the death of the Lord, until he arrives.
27  Consequently whoever eats the loaf or drinks the cup of the Lord unworthily will be guilty respecting the body and the blood of the Lord.
28  First let a man approve himself after scrutiny, and thus let him eat of the loaf and drink of the cup.
29  For he that eats and drinks eats and drinks judgment against himself if he does not discern the body.
30  That is why many among YOU are weak and sickly, and quite a few are sleeping [in death].
31  But if we would discern what we ourselves are, we would not be judged.
32  However, when we are judged, we are disciplined by Jehovah, that we may not become condemned with the world.
33  Consequently, my brothers, when YOU come together to eat [it], wait for one another.
34  If anyone is hungry, let him eat at home, that YOU may not come together for judgment. But the remaining matters I will set in order when I get there.
1 corinthians 12
12  Now concerning the spiritual gifts, brothers, I do not want YOU to be ignorant.
2  YOU know that when YOU were people of the nations, YOU were being led away to those voiceless idols just as YOU happened to be led.
3  Therefore I would have YOU know that nobody when speaking by God’s spirit says: “Jesus is accursed!” and nobody can say: “Jesus is Lord!” except by holy spirit.
4  Now there are varieties of gifts, but there is the same spirit; 
5  and there are varieties of ministries, and yet there is the same Lord; 
6  and there are varieties of operations, and yet it is the same God who performs all the operations in all persons.
7  But the manifestation of the spirit is given to each one for a beneficial purpose.
8  For example, to one there is given through the spirit speech of wisdom, to another speech of knowledge according to the same spirit,
9  to another faith by the same spirit, to another gifts of healings by that one spirit,
10  to yet another operations of powerful works, to another prophesying, to another discernment of inspired utterances, to another different tongues, and to another interpretation of tongues.
11  But all these operations the one and the same spirit performs, making a distribution to each one respectively just as it wills.
12  For just as the body is one but has many members, and all the members of that body, although being many, are one body, so also is the Christ.
13  For truly by one spirit we were all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether slaves or free, and we were all made to drink one spirit.
14  For the body, indeed, is not one member, but many.
15  If the foot should say: “Because I am not a hand, I am no part of the body,” it is not for this reason no part of the body.
16  And if the ear should say: “Because I am not an eye, I am no part of the body,” it is not for this reason no part of the body.
17  If the whole body were an eye, where would the [sense of] hearing be? If it were all hearing, where would the smelling be?
18  But now God has set the members in the body, each one of them, just as he pleased.
19  If they were all one member, where would the body be?
20  But now they are many members, yet one body.
21  The eye cannot say to the hand: “I have no need of you”;  or, again, the head [cannot say] to the feet: “I have no need of YOU.”
22  But much rather is it the case that the members of the body which seem to be weaker are necessary,
23  and the parts of the body which we think to be less honorable, these we surround with more abundant honor, and so our unseemly parts have the more abundant comeliness,
24  whereas our comely parts do not need anything. Nevertheless, God compounded the body, giving honor more abundant to the part which had a lack,
25  so that there should be no division in the body, but that its members should have the same care for one another.
26  And if one member suffers, all the other members suffer with it;  or if a member is glorified, all the other members rejoice with it.
27  Now YOU are Christ’s body, and members individually.
28  And God has set the respective ones in the congregation, first, apostles;  second, prophets;  third, teachers;  then powerful works;  then gifts of healings;  helpful services, abilities to direct, different tongues.
29  Not all are apostles, are they? Not all are prophets, are they? Not all are teachers, are they? Not all perform powerful works, do they?
30  Not all have gifts of healings, do they? Not all speak in tongues, do they? Not all are translators, are they?
31  But keep zealously seeking the greater gifts. And yet I show YOU a surpassing way.
1 corinthians 13
13  If I speak in the tongues of men and of angels but do not have love, I have become a sounding [piece of] brass or a clashing cymbal.
2  And if I have the gift of prophesying and am acquainted with all the sacred secrets and all knowledge, and if I have all the faith so as to transplant mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing.
3  And if I give all my belongings to feed others, and if I hand over my body, that I may boast, but do not have love, I am not profited at all.
4  Love is long-suffering and kind. Love is not jealous, it does not brag, does not get puffed up,
5  does not behave indecently, does not look for its own interests, does not become provoked. It does not keep account of the injury.
6  It does not rejoice over unrighteousness, but rejoices with the truth.
7  It bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.
8  Love never fails. But whether there are [gifts of] prophesying, they will be done away with;  whether there are tongues, they will cease;  whether there is knowledge, it will be done away with.
9  For we have partial knowledge and we prophesy partially; 
10  but when that which is complete arrives, that which is partial will be done away with.
11  When I was a babe, I used to speak as a babe, to think as a babe, to reason as a babe;  but now that I have become a man, I have done away with the [traits] of a babe.
12  For at present we see in hazy outline by means of a metal mirror, but then it will be face to face. At present I know partially, but then I shall know accurately even as I am accurately known.
13  Now, however, there remain faith, hope, love, these three;  but the greatest of these is love.
1 corinthians 14
14  Pursue love, yet keep zealously seeking the spiritual gifts, but preferably that YOU may prophesy.
2  For he that speaks in a tongue speaks, not to men, but to God, for no one listens, but he speaks sacred secrets by the spirit.
3  However, he that prophesies upbuilds and encourages and consoles men by his speech.
4  He that speaks in a tongue upbuilds himself, but he that prophesies upbuilds a congregation.
5  Now I would like for all of YOU to speak in tongues, but I prefer that YOU prophesy. Indeed, he that prophesies is greater than he that speaks in tongues, unless, in fact, he translates, that the congregation may receive upbuilding.
6  But at this time, brothers, if I should come speaking to YOU in tongues, what good would I do YOU unless I spoke to YOU either with a revelation or with knowledge or with a prophecy or with a teaching?
7  As it is, the inanimate things give off sound, whether a flute or a harp;  unless it makes an interval to the tones, how will it be known what is being played on the flute or on the harp?
8  For truly, if the trumpet sounds an indistinct call, who will get ready for battle?
9  In the same way also, unless YOU through the tongue utter speech easily understood, how will it be known what is being spoken? YOU will, in fact, be speaking into the air.
10  It may be that there are so many kinds of speech sounds in the world, and yet no [kind] is without meaning.
11  If, then, I do not understand the force of the speech sound, I shall be a foreigner to the one speaking, and the one speaking will be a foreigner to me.
12  So also YOU yourselves, since YOU are zealously desirous of [gifts of the] spirit, seek to abound in them for the upbuilding of the congregation.
13  Therefore let the one who speaks in a tongue pray that he may translate.
14  For if I am praying in a tongue, it is my [gift of the] spirit that is praying, but my mind is unfruitful.
15  What is to be done, then? I will pray with the [gift of the] spirit, but I will also pray with [my] mind. I will sing praise with the [gift of the] spirit, but I will also sing praise with [my] mind.
16  Otherwise, if you offer praise with a [gift of the] spirit, how will the man occupying the seat of the ordinary person say “Amen” to your giving of thanks, since he does not know what you are saying?
17  True, you give thanks in a fine way, but the other man is not being built up.
18  I thank God, I speak in more tongues than all of YOU do.
19  Nevertheless, in a congregation I would rather speak five words with my mind, that I might also instruct others orally, than ten thousand words in a tongue.
20  Brothers, do not become young children in powers of understanding, but be babes as to badness;  yet become full-grown in powers of understanding.
21  In the Law it is written: “‘With the tongues of foreigners and with the lips of strangers I will speak to this people, and yet not even then will they give heed to me,’ says Jehovah.”
22  Consequently tongues are for a sign, not to the believers, but to the unbelievers, whereas prophesying is, not for the unbelievers, but for the believers.
23  Therefore, if the whole congregation comes together to one place and they all speak in tongues, but ordinary people or unbelievers come in, will they not say that YOU are mad?
24  But if YOU are all prophesying and any unbeliever or ordinary person comes in, he is reproved by them all, he is closely examined by all; 
25  the secrets of his heart become manifest, so that he will fall upon [his] face and worship God, declaring: “God is really among YOU.”
26  What is to be done, then, brothers? When YOU come together, one has a psalm, another has a teaching, another has a revelation, another has a tongue, another has an interpretation. Let all things take place for upbuilding.
27  And if someone speaks in a tongue, let it be limited to two or three at the most, and in turns;  and let someone translate.
28  But if there be no translator, let him keep silent in the congregation and speak to himself and to God.
29  Further, let two or three prophets speak, and let the others discern the meaning.
30  But if there is a revelation to another one while sitting there, let the first one keep silent.
31  For YOU can all prophesy one by one, that all may learn and all be encouraged.
32  And [gifts of] the spirit of the prophets are to be controlled by the prophets.
33  For God is [a God], not of disorder, but of peace. As in all the congregations of the holy ones,
34  let the women keep silent in the congregations, for it is not permitted for them to speak, but let them be in subjection, even as the Law says.
35  If, then, they want to learn something, let them question their own husbands at home, for it is disgraceful for a woman to speak in a congregation.
36  What? Was it from YOU that the word of God came forth, or was it only as far as YOU that it reached?
37  If anyone thinks he is a prophet or gifted with the spirit, let him acknowledge the things I am writing to YOU, because they are the Lord’s commandment.
38  But if anyone is ignorant, he continues ignorant.
39  Consequently, my brothers, keep zealously seeking the prophesying, and yet do not forbid the speaking in tongues.
40  But let all things take place decently and by arrangement.
1 corinthians 15
15  Now I make known to YOU, brothers, the good news which I declared to YOU, which YOU also received, in which YOU also stand,
2  through which YOU are also being saved, with the speech with which I declared the good news to YOU, if YOU are holding it fast, unless, in fact, YOU became believers to no purpose.
3  For I handed on to YOU, among the first things, that which I also received, that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures; 
4  and that he was buried, yes, that he has been raised up the third day according to the Scriptures; 
5  and that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve.
6  After that he appeared to upward of five hundred brothers at one time, the most of whom remain to the present, but some have fallen asleep [in death].
7  After that he appeared to James, then to all the apostles; 
8  but last of all he appeared also to me as if to one born prematurely.
9  For I am the least of the apostles, and I am not fit to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the congregation of God.
10  But by God’s undeserved kindness I am what I am. And his undeserved kindness that was toward me did not prove to be in vain, but I labored in excess of them all, yet not I but the undeserved kindness of God that is with me.
11  However, whether it is I or they, so we are preaching and so YOU have believed.
12  Now if Christ is being preached that he has been raised up from the dead, how is it some among YOU say there is no resurrection of the dead?
13  If, indeed, there is no resurrection of the dead, neither has Christ been raised up.
14  But if Christ has not been raised up, our preaching is certainly in vain, and our faith is in vain.
15  Moreover, we are also found false witnesses of God, because we have borne witness against God that he raised up the Christ, but whom he did not raise up if the dead are really not to be raised up.
16  For if the dead are not to be raised up, neither has Christ been raised up.
17  Further, if Christ has not been raised up, YOUR faith is useless;  YOU are yet in YOUR sins.
18  In fact, also, those who fell asleep [in death] in union with Christ perished.
19  If in this life only we have hoped in Christ, we are of all men most to be pitied.
20  However, now Christ has been raised up from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep [in death].
21  For since death is through a man, resurrection of the dead is also through a man.
22  For just as in Adam all are dying, so also in the Christ all will be made alive.
23  But each one in his own rank: Christ the firstfruits, afterward those who belong to the Christ during his presence.
24  Next, the end, when he hands over the kingdom to his God and Father, when he has brought to nothing all government and all authority and power.
25  For he must rule as king until [God] has put all enemies under his feet.
26  As the last enemy, death is to be brought to nothing.
27  For [God] “subjected all things under his feet.” But when he says that ‘all things have been subjected,’ it is evident that it is with the exception of the one who subjected all things to him.
28  But when all things will have been subjected to him, then the Son himself will also subject himself to the One who subjected all things to him, that God may be all things to everyone.
29  Otherwise, what will they do who are being baptized for the purpose of [being] dead ones? If the dead are not to be raised up at all, why are they also being baptized for the purpose of [being] such?
30  Why are we also in peril every hour?
31  Daily I face death. This I affirm by the exultation over YOU, brothers, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord.
32  If, like men, I have fought with wild beasts at Ephesus, of what good is it to me? If the dead are not to be raised up, “let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we are to die.”
33  Do not be misled. Bad associations spoil useful habits.
34  Wake up to soberness in a righteous way and do not practice sin, for some are without knowledge of God. I am speaking to move YOU to shame.
35  Nevertheless, someone will say: “How are the dead to be raised up? Yes, with what sort of body are they coming?”
36  You unreasonable person! What you sow is not made alive unless first it dies; 
37  and as for what you sow, you sow, not the body that will develop, but a bare grain, it may be, of wheat or any one of the rest; 
38  but God gives it a body just as it has pleased him, and to each of the seeds its own body.
39  Not all flesh is the same flesh, but there is one of mankind, and there is another flesh of cattle, and another flesh of birds, and another of fish.
40  And there are heavenly bodies, and earthly bodies;  but the glory of the heavenly bodies is one sort, and that of the earthly bodies is a different sort.
41  The glory of the sun is one sort, and the glory of the moon is another, and the glory of the stars is another;  in fact, star differs from star in glory.
42  So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption, it is raised up in incorruption.
43  It is sown in dishonor, it is raised up in glory. It is sown in weakness, it is raised up in power.
44  It is sown a physical body, it is raised up a spiritual body. If there is a physical body, there is also a spiritual one.
45  It is even so written: “The first man Adam became a living soul.” The last Adam became a life-giving spirit.
46  Nevertheless, the first is, not that which is spiritual, but that which is physical, afterward that which is spiritual.
47  The first man is out of the earth and made of dust;  the second man is out of heaven.
48  As the one made of dust [is], so those made of dust [are] also;  and as the heavenly one [is], so those who are heavenly [are] also.
49  And just as we have borne the image of the one made of dust, we shall bear also the image of the heavenly one.
50  However, this I say, brothers, that flesh and blood cannot inherit God’s kingdom, neither does corruption inherit incorruption.
51  Look! I tell YOU a sacred secret: We shall not all fall asleep [in death], but we shall all be changed,
52  in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, during the last trumpet. For the trumpet will sound, and the dead will be raised up incorruptible, and we shall be changed.
53  For this which is corruptible must put on incorruption, and this which is mortal must put on immortality.
54  But when [this which is corruptible puts on incorruption and] this which is mortal puts on immortality, then the saying will take place that is written: “Death is swallowed up forever.”
55  “Death, where is your victory? Death, where is your sting?”
56  The sting producing death is sin, but the power for sin is the Law.
57  But thanks to God, for he gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ!
58  Consequently, my beloved brothers, become steadfast, unmovable, always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord, knowing that YOUR labor is not in vain in connection with [the] Lord.
1 corinthians 16
16  Now concerning the collection that is for the holy ones, just as I gave orders to the congregations of Galatia, do that way also yourselves.
2  Every first day of the week let each of YOU at his own house set something aside in store as he may be prospering, so that when I arrive collections will not take place then.
3  But when I get there, whatever men YOU approve of by letters, these I shall send to carry YOUR kind gift to Jerusalem.
4  However, if it is fitting for me to go there also, they will go there with me.
5  But I shall come to YOU when I have gone through Macedonia, for I am going through Macedonia; 
6  and perhaps I shall stay or even pass the winter with YOU, that YOU may conduct me partway to where I may be going.
7  For I do not want to see YOU just now on [my] passing through, for I hope to remain some time with YOU, if Jehovah permits.
8  But I am remaining in Ephesus until the [festival of] Pentecost; 
9  for a large door that leads to activity has been opened to me, but there are many opposers.
10  However, if Timothy arrives, see that he becomes free of fear among YOU, for he is performing the work of Jehovah, even as I am.
11  Let no one, therefore, look down upon him. Conduct him partway in peace, that he may get here to me, for I am waiting for him with the brothers.
12  Now concerning Apollos our brother, I entreated him very much to come to YOU with the brothers, and yet it was not his will at all to come now;  but he will come when he has the opportunity.
13  Stay awake, stand firm in the faith, carry on as men, grow mighty.
14  Let all YOUR affairs take place with love.
15  Now I exhort YOU, brothers: YOU know that the household of Stephanas is the firstfruits of Achaia and that they set themselves to minister to the holy ones.
16  May YOU also keep submitting yourselves to persons of that kind and to everyone cooperating and laboring.
17  But I rejoice over the presence of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus, because they have made up for YOUR not being here.
18  For they have refreshed my spirit and YOURS. Therefore recognize men of that sort.
19  The congregations of Asia send YOU their greetings. Aquila and Prisca together with the congregation that is in their house greet YOU heartily in [the] Lord.
20  All the brothers greet YOU. Greet one another with a holy kiss.
21  [Here is] my greeting, Paul’s, in my own hand.
22  If anyone has no affection for the Lord, let him be accursed. O our Lord, come!
23  May the undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus be with YOU.
24  May my love be with all of YOU in union with Christ Jesus.
2 corinthians 1
1  Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, and Timothy [our] brother to the congregation of God that is in Corinth, together with all the holy ones who are in all of Achaia:
2  May YOU have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and [the] Lord Jesus Christ.
3  Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of tender mercies and the God of all comfort,
4  who comforts us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort those in any sort of tribulation through the comfort with which we ourselves are being comforted by God.
5  For just as the sufferings for the Christ abound in us, so the comfort we get also abounds through the Christ.
6  Now whether we are in tribulation, it is for YOUR comfort and salvation;  or whether we are being comforted, it is for YOUR comfort that operates to make YOU endure the same sufferings that we also suffer.
7  And so our hope for YOU is unwavering, knowing as we do that, just as YOU are sharers of the sufferings, in the same way YOU will also share the comfort.
8  For we do not wish YOU to be ignorant, brothers, about the tribulation that happened to us in the [district of] Asia, that we were under extreme pressure beyond our strength, so that we were very uncertain even of our lives.
9  In fact, we felt within ourselves that we had received the sentence of death. This was that we might have our trust, not in ourselves, but in the God who raises up the dead.
10  From such a great thing as death he did rescue us and will rescue us;  and our hope is in him that he will also rescue us further.
11  YOU also can help along by YOUR supplication for us, in order that thanks may be given by many in our behalf for what is kindly given to us due to many [prayerful] faces.
12  For the thing we boast of is this, to which our conscience bears witness, that with holiness and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom but with God’s undeserved kindness, we have conducted ourselves in the world, but more especially toward YOU.
13  For we are really not writing YOU things except those which YOU well know or also recognize;  and which I hope YOU will continue to recognize to the end,
14  just as YOU have also recognized, to an extent, that we are a cause for YOU to boast, just as YOU will also be for us in the day of our Lord Jesus.
15  So, with this confidence, I was intending before to come to YOU, that YOU might have a second [occasion for] joy,
16  and after a stopover with YOU to go to Macedonia, and to come back from Macedonia to YOU and be conducted partway by YOU to Judea.
17  Well, when I had such an intention, I did not indulge in any lightness, did I? Or what things I purpose, do I purpose [them] according to the flesh, that with me there should be “Yes, Yes” and “No, No”?
18  But God can be relied upon that our speech addressed to YOU is not Yes and yet No.
19  For the Son of God, Christ Jesus, who was preached among YOU through us, that is, through me and Silvanus and Timothy, did not become Yes and yet No, but Yes has become Yes in his case.
20  For no matter how many the promises of God are, they have become Yes by means of him. Therefore also through him is the “Amen” [said] to God for glory through us.
21  But he who guarantees that YOU and we belong to Christ and he who has anointed us is God.
22  He has also put his seal upon us and has given us the token of what is to come, that is, the spirit, in our hearts.
23  Now I call upon God as a witness against my own soul that it is to spare YOU that I have not yet come to Corinth.
24  Not that we are the masters over YOUR faith, but we are fellow workers for YOUR joy, for it is by [YOUR] faith that YOU are standing.
2 corinthians 2
2  For this is what I have decided for myself, not to come to YOU again in sadness.
2  For if I make YOU sad, who indeed is there to cheer me except the one that is made sad by me?
3  And so I wrote this very thing, that, when I come, I may not get sad because of those over whom I ought to rejoice;  because I have confidence in all of YOU that the joy I have is that of all of YOU.
4  For out of much tribulation and anguish of heart I wrote YOU with many tears, not that YOU might be saddened, but that YOU might know the love that I have more especially for YOU.
5  Now if anyone has caused sadness, he has saddened, not me, but all of YOU to an extent—not to be too harsh in what I say.
6  This rebuke given by the majority is sufficient for such a man,
7  so that, on the contrary now, YOU should kindly forgive and comfort [him], that somehow such a man may not be swallowed up by his being overly sad.
8  Therefore I exhort YOU to confirm YOUR love for him.
9  For to this end also I write to ascertain the proof of YOU, whether YOU are obedient in all things.
10  Anything YOU kindly forgive anyone, I do too. In fact, as for me, whatever I have kindly forgiven, if I have kindly forgiven anything, it has been for YOUR sakes in Christ’s sight; 
11  that we may not be overreached by Satan, for we are not ignorant of his designs.
12  Now when I arrived in Troas to declare the good news about the Christ, and a door was opened to me in [the] Lord,
13  I got no relief in my spirit on account of not finding Titus my brother, but I said good-bye to them and departed for Macedonia.
14  But thanks be to God who always leads us in a triumphal procession in company with the Christ and makes the odor of the knowledge of him perceptible through us in every place!
15  For to God we are a sweet odor of Christ among those who are being saved and among those who are perishing; 
16  to the latter ones an odor issuing from death to death, to the former ones an odor issuing from life to life. And who is adequately qualified for these things?
17  [We are; ] for we are not peddlers of the word of God as many men are, but as out of sincerity, yes, as sent from God, under God’s view, in company with Christ, we are speaking.
2 corinthians 3
3  Are we starting again to recommend ourselves? Or do we, perhaps, like some men, need letters of recommendation to YOU or from YOU?
2  YOU yourselves are our letter, inscribed on our hearts and known and being read by all mankind.
3  For YOU are shown to be a letter of Christ written by us as ministers, inscribed not with ink but with spirit of a living God, not on stone tablets, but on fleshly tablets, on hearts.
4  Now through the Christ we have this sort of confidence toward God.
5  Not that we of ourselves are adequately qualified to reckon anything as issuing from ourselves, but our being adequately qualified issues from God,
6  who has indeed adequately qualified us to be ministers of a new covenant, not of a written code, but of spirit;  for the written code condemns to death, but the spirit makes alive.
7  Moreover, if the code which administers death and which was engraved in letters in stones came about in a glory, so that the sons of Israel could not gaze intently at the face of Moses because of the glory of his face, [a glory] that was to be done away with,
8  why should not the administering of the spirit be much more with glory?
9  For if the code administering condemnation was glorious, much more does the administering of righteousness abound with glory.
10  In fact, even that which has once been made glorious has been stripped of glory in this respect, because of the glory that excels it.
11  For if that which was to be done away with was brought in with glory, much more would that which remains be with glory.
12  Therefore, as we have such a hope, we are using great freeness of speech,
13  and not doing as when Moses would put a veil upon his face, that the sons of Israel might not gaze intently at the end of that which was to be done away with.
14  But their mental powers were dulled. For to this present day the same veil remains unlifted at the reading of the old covenant, because it is done away with by means of Christ.
15  In fact, down till today whenever Moses is read, a veil lies upon their hearts.
16  But when there is a turning to Jehovah, the veil is taken away.
17  Now Jehovah is the Spirit;  and where the spirit of Jehovah is, there is freedom.
18  And all of us, while we with unveiled faces reflect like mirrors the glory of Jehovah, are transformed into the same image from glory to glory, exactly as done by Jehovah [the] Spirit.
2 corinthians 4
4  That is why, since we have this ministry according to the mercy that was shown us, we do not give up; 
2  but we have renounced the underhanded things of which to be ashamed, not walking with cunning, neither adulterating the word of God, but by making the truth manifest recommending ourselves to every human conscience in the sight of God.
3  If, now, the good news we declare is in fact veiled, it is veiled among those who are perishing,
4  among whom the god of this system of things has blinded the minds of the unbelievers, that the illumination of the glorious good news about the Christ, who is the image of God, might not shine through.
5  For we are preaching, not ourselves, but Christ Jesus as Lord, and ourselves as YOUR slaves for Jesus’ sake.
6  For God is he who said: “Let the light shine out of darkness,” and he has shone on our hearts to illuminate [them] with the glorious knowledge of God by the face of Christ.
7  However, we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the power beyond what is normal may be God’s and not that out of ourselves.
8  We are pressed in every way, but not cramped beyond movement;  we are perplexed, but not absolutely with no way out; 
9  we are persecuted, but not left in the lurch;  we are thrown down, but not destroyed.
10  Always we endure everywhere in our body the death-dealing treatment given to Jesus, that the life of Jesus may also be made manifest in our body.
11  For we who live are ever being brought face to face with death for Jesus’ sake, that the life of Jesus may also be made manifest in our mortal flesh.
12  Consequently death is at work in us, but life in YOU.
13  Now because we have the same spirit of faith as that of which it is written: “I exercised faith, therefore I spoke,” we too exercise faith and therefore we speak,
14  knowing that he who raised Jesus up will raise us up also together with Jesus and will present us together with YOU.
15  For all things are for YOUR sakes, in order that the undeserved kindness which was multiplied should abound because of the thanksgiving of many more to the glory of God.
16  Therefore we do not give up, but even if the man we are outside is wasting away, certainly the man we are inside is being renewed from day to day.
17  For though the tribulation is momentary and light, it works out for us a glory that is of more and more surpassing weight and is everlasting; 
18  while we keep our eyes, not on the things seen, but on the things unseen. For the things seen are temporary, but the things unseen are everlasting.
2 corinthians 5
5  For we know that if our earthly house, this tent, should be dissolved, we are to have a building from God, a house not made with hands, everlasting in the heavens.
2  For in this dwelling house we do indeed groan, earnestly desiring to put on the one for us from heaven,
3  so that, having really put it on, we shall not be found naked.
4  In fact, we who are in this tent groan, being weighed down;  because we want, not to put it off, but to put on the other, that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life.
5  Now he that produced us for this very thing is God, who gave us the token of what is to come, that is, the spirit.
6  We are therefore always of good courage and know that, while we have our home in the body, we are absent from the Lord,
7  for we are walking by faith, not by sight.
8  But we are of good courage and are well pleased rather to become absent from the body and to make our home with the Lord.
9  Therefore we are also making it our aim that, whether having our home with him or being absent from him, we may be acceptable to him.
10  For we must all be made manifest before the judgment seat of the Christ, that each one may get his award for the things done through the body, according to the things he has practiced, whether it is good or vile.
11  Knowing, therefore, the fear of the Lord, we keep persuading men, but we have been made manifest to God. However, I hope that we have been made manifest also to YOUR consciences.
12  We are not again recommending ourselves to YOU, but giving YOU an inducement for boasting in respect to us, that YOU may have [an answer] for those who boast over the outward appearance but not over the heart.
13  For if we were out of our mind, it was for God;  if we are sound in mind, it is for YOU.
14  For the love the Christ has compels us, because this is what we have judged, that one man died for all;  so, then, all had died; 
15  and he died for all that those who live might live no longer for themselves, but for him who died for them and was raised up.
16  Consequently from now on we know no man according to the flesh. Even if we have known Christ according to the flesh, certainly we now know him so no more.
17  Consequently if anyone is in union with Christ, he is a new creation;  the old things passed away, look! new things have come into existence.
18  But all things are from God, who reconciled us to himself through Christ and gave us the ministry of the reconciliation,
19  namely, that God was by means of Christ reconciling a world to himself, not reckoning to them their trespasses, and he committed the word of the reconciliation to us.
20  We are therefore ambassadors substituting for Christ, as though God were making entreaty through us. As substitutes for Christ we beg: “Become reconciled to God.”
21  The one who did not know sin he made to be sin for us, that we might become God’s righteousness by means of him.
2 corinthians 6
6  Working together with him, we also entreat YOU not to accept the undeserved kindness of God and miss its purpose.
2  For he says: “In an acceptable time I heard you, and in a day of salvation I helped you.” Look! Now is the especially acceptable time. Look! Now is the day of salvation.
3  In no way are we giving any cause for stumbling, that our ministry might not be found fault with; 
4  but in every way we recommend ourselves as God’s ministers, by the endurance of much, by tribulations, by cases of need, by difficulties,
5  by beatings, by prisons, by disorders, by labors, by sleepless nights, by times without food,
6  by purity, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by holy spirit, by love free from hypocrisy,
7  by truthful speech, by God’s power;  through the weapons of righteousness on the right hand and on the left,
8  through glory and dishonor, through bad report and good report;  as deceivers and yet truthful,
9  as being unknown and yet being recognized, as dying and yet, look! we live, as disciplined and yet not delivered to death,
10  as sorrowing but ever rejoicing, as poor but making many rich, as having nothing and yet possessing all things.
11  Our mouth has been opened to YOU, Corinthians, our heart has widened out.
12  YOU are not cramped for room within us, but YOU are cramped for room in YOUR own tender affections.
13  So, as a recompense in return—I speak as to children—YOU, too, widen out.
14  Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers. For what fellowship do righteousness and lawlessness have? Or what sharing does light have with darkness?
15  Further, what harmony is there between Christ and Belial? Or what portion does a faithful person have with an unbeliever?
16  And what agreement does God’s temple have with idols? For we are a temple of a living God;  just as God said: “I shall reside among them and walk among [them], and I shall be their God, and they will be my people.”
17  “‘Therefore get out from among them, and separate yourselves,’ says Jehovah, ‘and quit touching the unclean thing’”;  “‘and I will take YOU in.’”
18  “‘And I shall be a father to YOU, and YOU will be sons and daughters to me,’ says Jehovah the Almighty.”
2 corinthians 7
7  Therefore, since we have these promises, beloved ones, let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in God’s fear.
2  ALLOW room for us. We have wronged no one, we have corrupted no one, we have taken advantage of no one.
3  I do not say this to condemn YOU. For I have said before that YOU are in our hearts to die and to live with us.
4  I have great freeness of speech toward YOU. I have great boasting in regard to YOU. I am filled with comfort, I am overflowing with joy in all our affliction.
5  In fact, when we arrived in Macedonia, our flesh got no relief, but we continued to be afflicted in every manner—there were fights without, fears within.
6  Nevertheless God, who comforts those laid low, comforted us by the presence of Titus; 
7  yet not alone by his presence, but also by the comfort with which he had been comforted over YOU, as he brought us word again of YOUR longing, YOUR mourning, YOUR zeal for me;  so that I rejoiced yet more.
8  Hence even if I saddened YOU by my letter, I do not regret it. Even if I did at first regret it, (I see that that letter saddened YOU, though but for a little while,)
9  now I rejoice, not because YOU were just saddened, but because YOU were saddened into repenting;  for YOU were saddened in a godly way, that YOU might suffer no damage in anything due to us.
10  For sadness in a godly way makes for repentance to salvation that is not to be regretted;  but the sadness of the world produces death.
11  For, look! this very thing, YOUR being saddened in a godly way, what a great earnestness it produced in YOU, yes, clearing of yourselves, yes, indignation, yes, fear, yes, longing, yes, zeal, yes, righting of the wrong! In every respect YOU demonstrated yourselves to be chaste in this matter.
12  Certainly, although I wrote YOU, I did it, neither for the one who did the wrong, nor for the one who was wronged, but that YOUR earnestness for us might be made manifest among YOU in the sight of God.
13  That is why we have been comforted. However, in addition to our comfort we rejoiced still more abundantly due to the joy of Titus, because his spirit has been refreshed by all of YOU.
14  For if I have made any boast to him about YOU, I have not been put to shame;  but as we have spoken all things to YOU in truth, so also our boasting before Titus has proved to be true.
15  Also, his tender affections are more abundant toward YOU, while he calls to mind the obedience of all of YOU, how YOU received him with fear and trembling.
16  I rejoice that in every way I may have good courage by reason of YOU.
2 corinthians 8
8  Now we let YOU know, brothers, about the undeserved kindness of God that has been bestowed upon the congregations of Macedonia,
2  that during a great test under affliction their abundance of joy and their deep poverty made the riches of their generosity abound.
3  For according to their actual ability, yes, I testify, beyond their actual ability this was,
4  while they of their own accord kept begging us with much entreaty for the [privilege of] kindly giving and for a share in the ministry destined for the holy ones.
5  And not merely as we had hoped, but first they gave themselves to the Lord and to us through God’s will.
6  This led us to encourage Titus that, just as he had been the one to initiate it among YOU, so too he should complete this same kind giving on YOUR part.
7  Nevertheless, just as YOU are abounding in everything, in faith and word and knowledge and all earnestness and in this love of ours to YOU, may YOU also abound in this kind giving.
8  It is not in the way of commanding YOU, but in view of the earnestness of others and to make a test of the genuineness of YOUR love, that I am speaking.
9  For YOU know the undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich he became poor for YOUR sakes, that YOU might become rich through his poverty.
10  And in this I render an opinion: for this matter is of benefit to YOU, seeing that already a year ago YOU initiated not only the doing but also the wanting [to do]; 
11  now, then, finish up also the doing of it, in order that, just as there was a readiness to want to do, so also there should be a finishing up of it out of what YOU have.
12  For if the readiness is there first, it is especially acceptable according to what a person has, not according to what a person does not have.
13  For I do not mean for it to be easy for others, but hard on YOU; 
14  but that by means of an equalizing YOUR surplus just now might offset their deficiency, in order that their surplus might also come to offset YOUR deficiency, that an equalizing might take place.
15  Just as it is written: “The person with much did not have too much, and the person with little did not have too little.”
16  Now thanks be to God for putting the same earnestness for YOU in the heart of Titus,
17  because he has indeed responded to the encouragement, but, being very earnest, he is going forth of his own accord to YOU.
18  But we are sending along with him the brother whose praise in connection with the good news has spread through all the congregations.
19  Not only that, but he was also appointed by the congregations to be our traveling companion in connection with this kind gift to be administered by us for the glory of the Lord and in proof of our ready mind.
20  Thus we are avoiding having any man find fault with us in connection with this liberal contribution to be administered by us.
21  For we “make honest provision, not only in the sight of Jehovah, but also in the sight of men.”
22  Moreover, we are sending with them our brother whom we have often proved in many things to be earnest, but now much more earnest due to his great confidence in YOU.
23  If, though, there is any question about Titus, he is a sharer with me and a fellow worker for YOUR interests;  or if about our brothers, they are apostles of congregations and a glory of Christ.
24  Therefore demonstrate to them the proof of YOUR love and of what we boasted about YOU, before the face of the congregations.
2 corinthians 9
9  Now concerning the ministry that is for the holy ones, it is superfluous for me to write YOU,
2  for I know YOUR readiness of mind of which I am boasting to the Macedonians about YOU, that Achaia has stood ready now for a year, and YOUR zeal has stirred up the majority of them.
3  But I am sending the brothers, that our boasting about YOU might not prove empty in this respect, but that YOU may really be ready, just as I used to say YOU would be.
4  Otherwise, in some way, if Macedonians should come with me and find YOU not ready, we—not to say YOU—should be put to shame in this assurance of ours.
5  Therefore I thought it necessary to encourage the brothers to come to YOU in advance and to get ready in advance YOUR bountiful gift previously promised, that thus this might be ready as a bountiful gift and not as something extorted.
6  But as to this, he that sows sparingly will also reap sparingly;  and he that sows bountifully will also reap bountifully.
7  Let each one do just as he has resolved in his heart, not grudgingly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver.
8  God, moreover, is able to make all his undeserved kindness abound toward YOU, that, while YOU always have full self-sufficiency in everything, YOU may have plenty for every good work.
9  (Just as it is written: “He has distributed widely, he has given to the poor ones, his righteousness continues forever.”
10  Now he that abundantly supplies seed to the sower and bread for eating will supply and multiply the seed for YOU to sow and will increase the products of YOUR righteousness.)
11  In everything YOU are being enriched for every sort of generosity, which produces through us an expression of thanks to God; 
12  because the ministry of this public service is not only to supply abundantly the wants of the holy ones but also to be rich with many expressions of thanks to God.
13  Through the proof that this ministry gives, they glorify God because YOU are submissive to the good news about the Christ, as YOU publicly declare YOU are, and because YOU are generous in YOUR contribution to them and to all; 
14  and with supplication for YOU they long for YOU because of the surpassing undeserved kindness of God upon YOU.
15  Thanks be to God for his indescribable free gift.
2 corinthians 10
10  Now I myself, Paul, entreat YOU by the mildness and kindness of the Christ, lowly though I am in appearance among YOU, whereas when absent I am bold toward YOU.
2  Indeed I beg that, when present, I may not use boldness with that confidence with which I am counting on taking bold measures against some who appraise us as if we walked according to [what we are in the] flesh.
3  For though we walk in the flesh, we do not wage warfare according to [what we are in the] flesh.
4  For the weapons of our warfare are not fleshly, but powerful by God for overturning strongly entrenched things.
5  For we are overturning reasonings and every lofty thing raised up against the knowledge of God;  and we are bringing every thought into captivity to make it obedient to the Christ; 
6  and we are holding ourselves in readiness to inflict punishment for every disobedience, as soon as YOUR own obedience has been fully carried out.
7  YOU look at things according to their face value. If anyone trusts in himself that he belongs to Christ, let him again take this fact into account for himself, that, just as he belongs to Christ, so do we also.
8  For even if I should boast a bit too much about the authority that the Lord gave us to build YOU up and not to tear YOU down, I would not be put to shame,
9  that I may not seem to want to terrify YOU by [my] letters.
10  For, say they: “[His] letters are weighty and forceful, but [his] presence in person is weak and [his] speech contemptible.”
11  Let such a man take this into account, that what we are in our word by letters when absent, such we shall also be in action when present.
12  For we do not dare to class ourselves among some or compare ourselves with some who recommend themselves. Certainly they in measuring themselves by themselves and comparing themselves with themselves have no understanding.
13  For our part we will boast, not outside our assigned boundaries, but according to the boundary of the territory that God apportioned to us by measure, making it reach even as far as YOU.
14  Really we are not overstretching ourselves as if we did not reach to YOU, for we were the first to come even as far as YOU in declaring the good news about the Christ.
15  No, we are not boasting outside our assigned boundaries in the labors of someone else, but we entertain hope that, as YOUR faith is being increased, we may be made great among YOU with reference to our territory. Then we will abound still more,
16  to declare the good news to the countries beyond YOU, so as not to boast in someone else’s territory where things are already prepared.
17  “But he that boasts, let him boast in Jehovah.”
18  For not the one who recommends himself is approved, but the man whom Jehovah recommends.
2 corinthians 11
11  I wish YOU would put up with me in some little unreasonableness. But, in fact, YOU are putting up with me!
2  For I am jealous over YOU with a godly jealousy, for I personally promised YOU in marriage to one husband that I might present YOU as a chaste virgin to the Christ.
3  But I am afraid that somehow, as the serpent seduced Eve by its cunning, YOUR minds might be corrupted away from the sincerity and the chastity that are due the Christ.
4  For, as it is, if someone comes and preaches a Jesus other than the one we preached, or YOU receive a spirit other than what YOU received, or good news other than what YOU accepted, YOU easily put up [with him].
5  For I consider that I have not in a single thing proved inferior to YOUR superfine apostles.
6  But even if I am unskilled in speech, I certainly am not in knowledge;  but in every way we manifested [it] to YOU in all things.
7  Or did I commit a sin by humbling myself that YOU might be exalted, because without cost I gladly declared the good news of God to YOU?
8  Other congregations I robbed by accepting provisions in order to minister to YOU; 
9  and yet when I was present with YOU and I fell in need, I did not become a burden to a single one, for the brothers that came from Macedonia abundantly supplied my deficiency. Yes, in every way I kept myself unburdensome to YOU and will keep myself so.
10  It is a truth of Christ in my case that no stop shall be put to this boasting of mine in the regions of Achaia.
11  For what reason? Because I do not love YOU? God knows [I do].
12  Now what I am doing I will still do, that I may cut off the pretext from those who are wanting a pretext for being found equal to us in the office of which they boast.
13  For such men are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into apostles of Christ.
14  And no wonder, for Satan himself keeps transforming himself into an angel of light.
15  It is therefore nothing great if his ministers also keep transforming themselves into ministers of righteousness. But their end shall be according to their works.
16  I say again, Let no man think I am unreasonable. Still, if YOU really do, accept me even if as unreasonable, that I too may do some little boasting.
17  What I speak I speak, not after the Lord’s example, but as in unreasonableness, in this cocksureness peculiar to boasting.
18  Since many are boasting according to the flesh, I too will boast.
19  For YOU gladly put up with the unreasonable persons, seeing YOU are reasonable.
20  In fact, YOU put up with whoever enslaves YOU, whoever devours [what YOU have], whoever grabs [what YOU have], whoever exalts himself over [YOU], whoever strikes YOU in the face.
21  I say this to [our] dishonor, as though our position had been weak. But if anyone else acts bold in something—I am talking unreasonably—I too am acting bold in it.
22  Are they Hebrews? I am one also. Are they Israelites? I am one also. Are they Abraham’s seed? I am also.
23  Are they ministers of Christ? I reply like a madman, I am more outstandingly one: in labors more plentifully, in prisons more plentifully, in blows to an excess, in near-deaths often.
24  By Jews I five times received forty strokes less one,
25  three times I was beaten with rods, once I was stoned, three times I experienced shipwreck, a night and a day I have spent in the deep; 
26  in journeys often, in dangers from rivers, in dangers from highwaymen, in dangers from [my own] race, in dangers from the nations, in dangers in the city, in dangers in the wilderness, in dangers at sea, in dangers among false brothers,
27  in labor and toil, in sleepless nights often, in hunger and thirst, in abstinence from food many times, in cold and nakedness.
28  Besides those things of an external kind, there is what rushes in on me from day to day, the anxiety for all the congregations.
29  Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is stumbled, and I am not incensed?
30  If boasting there must be, I will boast of the things having to do with my weakness.
31  The God and Father of the Lord Jesus, even the One who is to be praised forever, knows I am not lying.
32  In Damascus the governor under Aretas the king was guarding the city of the Damascenes to seize me,
33  but through a window in the wall I was lowered in a wicker basket and escaped his hands.
2 corinthians 12
12  I have to boast. It is not beneficial;  but I shall pass on to supernatural visions and revelations of [the] Lord.
2  I know a man in union with Christ who, fourteen years ago—whether in the body I do not know, or out of the body I do not know;  God knows—was caught away as such to the third heaven.
3  Yes, I know such a man—whether in the body or apart from the body, I do not know, God knows—
4  that he was caught away into paradise and heard unutterable words which it is not lawful for a man to speak.
5  Over such a man I will boast, but I will not boast over myself, except as respects [my] weaknesses.
6  For if I ever do want to boast, I shall not be unreasonable, for I shall say the truth. But I abstain, in order that no one should put to my credit more than what he sees I am or he hears from me,
7  just because of the excess of the revelations. Therefore, that I might not feel overly exalted, there was given me a thorn in the flesh, an angel of Satan, to keep slapping me, that I might not be overly exalted.
8  In this behalf I three times entreated the Lord that it might depart from me; 
9  and yet he really said to me: “My undeserved kindness is sufficient for you;  for [my] power is being made perfect in weakness.” Most gladly, therefore, will I rather boast as respects my weaknesses, that the power of the Christ may like a tent remain over me.
10  Therefore I take pleasure in weaknesses, in insults, in cases of need, in persecutions and difficulties, for Christ. For when I am weak, then I am powerful.
11  I have become unreasonable. YOU compelled me to, for I ought to have been recommended by YOU. For I did not prove to be inferior to [YOUR] superfine apostles in a single thing, even if I am nothing.
12  Indeed, the signs of an apostle were produced among YOU by all endurance, and by signs and portents and powerful works.
13  For in what respect is it that YOU became less than the rest of the congregations, except that I myself did not become a burden to YOU? Kindly forgive me this wrong.
14  Look! This is the third time I am ready to come to YOU, and yet I will not become a burden. For I am seeking, not YOUR possessions, but YOU;  for the children ought not to lay up for [their] parents, but the parents for [their] children.
15  For my part I will most gladly spend and be completely spent for YOUR souls. If I love YOU the more abundantly, am I to be loved the less?
16  But be that as it may, I did not burden YOU down. Nevertheless, YOU say, I was “crafty” and I caught YOU “by trickery.”
17  As for any one of those I have dispatched to YOU, I did not take advantage of YOU through him, did I?
18  I urged Titus and I dispatched the brother with him. Titus did not take advantage of YOU at all, did he? We walked in the same spirit, did we not? In the same footsteps, did we not?
19  Have YOU been thinking all this while that we have been making our defense to YOU? It is before God that we are speaking in connection with Christ. But, beloved ones, all things are for YOUR upbuilding.
20  For I am afraid that somehow, when I arrive, I may find YOU not as I could wish and I may prove to be to YOU not as YOU could wish, but, instead, there should somehow be strife, jealousy, cases of anger, contentions, backbitings, whisperings, cases of being puffed up, disorders.
21  Perhaps, when I come again, my God might humiliate me among YOU, and I might mourn over many of those who formerly sinned but have not repented over their uncleanness and fornication and loose conduct that they have practiced.
2 corinthians 13
13  This is the third time I am coming to YOU. “At the mouth of two witnesses or of three every matter must be established.”
2  I have said previously and, as if present the second time and yet absent now, I say in advance to those who have sinned before and to all the rest, that if ever I come again I will not spare,
3  since YOU are seeking a proof of Christ speaking in me, [Christ] who is not weak toward YOU but is powerful among YOU.
4  True, indeed, he was impaled owing to weakness, but he is alive owing to God’s power. True, also, we are weak with him, but we shall live together with him owing to God’s power toward YOU.
5  Keep testing whether YOU are in the faith, keep proving what YOU yourselves are. Or do YOU not recognize that Jesus Christ is in union with YOU? Unless YOU are disapproved.
6  I truly hope YOU will come to know we are not disapproved.
7  Now we pray to God that YOU may do nothing wrong, not that we ourselves may appear approved, but that YOU may be doing what is fine, though we ourselves may appear disapproved.
8  For we can do nothing against the truth, but only for the truth.
9  We certainly rejoice whenever we are weak but YOU are powerful;  and for this we are praying, YOUR being readjusted.
10  That is why I write these things while absent, that, when I am present, I may not act with severity according to the authority that the Lord gave me, to build up and not to tear down.
11  Finally, brothers, continue to rejoice, to be readjusted, to be comforted, to think in agreement, to live peaceably;  and the God of love and of peace will be with YOU.
12  Greet one another with a holy kiss.
13  All the holy ones send YOU their greetings.
14  The undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the sharing in the holy spirit be with all of YOU.
galatians 1
1  Paul, an apostle, neither from men nor through a man, but through Jesus Christ and God the Father, who raised him up from the dead,
2  and all the brothers with me, to the congregations of Galatia:
3  May YOU have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and [the] Lord Jesus Christ.
4  He gave himself for our sins that he might deliver us from the present wicked system of things according to the will of our God and Father,
5  to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
6  I marvel that YOU are being so quickly removed from the One who called YOU with Christ’s undeserved kindness over to another sort of good news.
7  But it is not another;  only there are certain ones who are causing YOU trouble and wanting to pervert the good news about the Christ.
8  However, even if we or an angel out of heaven were to declare to YOU as good news something beyond what we declared to YOU as good news, let him be accursed.
9  As we have said above, I also now say again, Whoever it is that is declaring to YOU as good news something beyond what YOU accepted, let him be accursed.
10  Is it, in fact, men I am now trying to persuade or God? Or am I seeking to please men? If I were yet pleasing men, I would not be Christ’s slave.
11  For I put YOU on notice, brothers, that the good news which was declared by me as good news is not something human; 
12  for neither did I receive it from man, nor was I taught [it], except through revelation by Jesus Christ.
13  YOU, of course, heard about my conduct formerly in Judaism, that to the point of excess I kept on persecuting the congregation of God and devastating it,
14  and I was making greater progress in Judaism than many of my own age in my race, as I was far more zealous for the traditions of my fathers.
15  But when God, who separated me from my mother’s womb and called [me] through his undeserved kindness, thought good
16  to reveal his Son in connection with me, that I might declare the good news about him to the nations, I did not go at once into conference with flesh and blood.
17  Neither did I go up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles previous to me, but I went off into Arabia, and I came back again to Damascus.
18  Then three years later I went up to Jerusalem to visit Cephas, and I stayed with him for fifteen days.
19  But I saw no one else of the apostles, only James the brother of the Lord.
20  Now as to the things I am writing YOU, look! in the sight of God, I am not lying.
21  After that I went into the regions of Syria and of Cilicia.
22  But I was unknown by face to the congregations of Judea that were in union with Christ; 
23  they only used to hear: “The man that formerly persecuted us is now declaring the good news about the faith which he formerly devastated.”
24  So they began glorifying God because of me.
galatians 2
2  Then after fourteen years I again went up to Jerusalem with Barnabas, taking also Titus along with me.
2  But I went up as a result of a revelation. And I laid before them the good news which I am preaching among the nations, privately, however, before those who were outstanding men, for fear that somehow I was running or had run in vain.
3  Nevertheless, not even Titus, who was with me, was compelled to be circumcised, although he was a Greek.
4  But because of the false brothers brought in quietly, who sneaked in to spy upon our freedom which we have in union with Christ Jesus, that they might completely enslave us—
5  to these we did not yield by way of submission, no, not for an hour, in order that the truth of the good news might continue with YOU.
6  But on the part of those who seemed to be something—whatever sort of men they formerly were makes no difference to me—God does not go by a man’s outward appearance—to me, in fact, those outstanding men imparted nothing new.
7  But, on the contrary, when they saw that I had entrusted to me the good news for those who are uncircumcised, just as Peter [had it] for those who are circumcised—
8  for He who gave Peter powers necessary for an apostleship to those who are circumcised gave powers also to me for those who are of the nations; 
9  yes, when they came to know the undeserved kindness that was given me, James and Cephas and John, the ones who seemed to be pillars, gave me and Barnabas the right hand of sharing together, that we should go to the nations, but they to those who are circumcised.
10  Only we should keep the poor in mind. This very thing I have also earnestly endeavored to do.
11  However, when Cephas came to Antioch, I resisted him face to face, because he stood condemned.
12  For before the arrival of certain men from James, he used to eat with people of the nations;  but when they arrived, he went withdrawing and separating himself, in fear of those of the circumcised class.
13  The rest of the Jews also joined him in putting on this pretense, so that even Barnabas was led along with them in their pretense.
14  But when I saw they were not walking straight according to the truth of the good news, I said to Cephas before them all: “If you, though you are a Jew, live as the nations do, and not as Jews do, how is it that you are compelling people of the nations to live according to Jewish practice?”
15  We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners from the nations,
16  knowing as we do that a man is declared righteous, not due to works of law, but only through faith toward Christ Jesus, even we have put our faith in Christ Jesus, that we may be declared righteous due to faith toward Christ, and not due to works of law, because due to works of law no flesh will be declared righteous.
17  Now if we, in seeking to be declared righteous by means of Christ, have also ourselves been found sinners, is Christ in reality sin’s minister? May that never happen!
18  For if the very things that I once threw down I build up again, I demonstrate myself to be a transgressor.
19  As for me, through law I died toward law, that I might become alive toward God.
20  I am impaled along with Christ. It is no longer I that live, but it is Christ that is living in union with me. Indeed, the life that I now live in flesh I live by the faith that is toward the Son of God, who loved me and handed himself over for me.
21  I do not shove aside the undeserved kindness of God;  for if righteousness is through law, Christ actually died for nothing.
galatians 3
3  O senseless Galatians, who is it that brought YOU under evil influence, YOU before whose eyes Jesus Christ was openly portrayed impaled?
2  This alone I want to learn from YOU: Did YOU receive the spirit due to works of law or due to a hearing by faith?
3  Are YOU so senseless? After starting in spirit are YOU now being completed in flesh?
4  Did YOU undergo so many sufferings to no purpose? If it really was to no purpose.
5  He, therefore, who supplies YOU the spirit and performs powerful works among YOU, does he do it owing to works of law or owing to a hearing by faith?
6  Just as Abraham “put faith in Jehovah, and it was counted to him as righteousness.”
7  Surely YOU know that those who adhere to faith are the ones who are sons of Abraham.
8  Now the Scripture, seeing in advance that God would declare people of the nations righteous due to faith, declared the good news beforehand to Abraham, namely: “By means of you all the nations will be blessed.”
9  Consequently those who adhere to faith are being blessed together with faithful Abraham.
10  For all those who depend upon works of law are under a curse;  for it is written: “Cursed is every one that does not continue in all the things written in the scroll of the Law in order to do them.”
11  Moreover, that by law no one is declared righteous with God is evident, because “the righteous one will live by reason of faith.”
12  Now the Law does not adhere to faith, but “he that does them shall live by means of them.”
13  Christ by purchase released us from the curse of the Law by becoming a curse instead of us, because it is written: “Accursed is every man hanged upon a stake.”
14  The purpose was that the blessing of Abraham might come to be by means of Jesus Christ for the nations, that we might receive the promised spirit through our faith.
15  Brothers, I speak with a human illustration: A validated covenant, though it is a man’s, no one sets aside or attaches additions to it.
16  Now the promises were spoken to Abraham and to his seed. It says, not: “And to seeds,” as in the case of many such, but as in the case of one: “And to your seed,” who is Christ.
17  Further, I say this: As to the covenant previously validated by God, the Law that has come into being four hundred and thirty years later does not invalidate it, so as to abolish the promise.
18  For if the inheritance is due to law, it is no longer due to promise;  whereas God has kindly given it to Abraham through a promise.
19  Why, then, the Law? It was added to make transgressions manifest, until the seed should arrive to whom the promise had been made;  and it was transmitted through angels by the hand of a mediator.
20  Now there is no mediator where only one person is concerned, but God is only one.
21  Is the Law, therefore, against the promises of God? May that never happen! For if a law had been given that was able to give life, righteousness would actually have been by means of law.
22  But the Scripture delivered up all things together to the custody of sin, that the promise resulting from faith toward Jesus Christ might be given to those exercising faith.
23  However, before the faith arrived, we were being guarded under law, being delivered up together into custody, looking to the faith that was destined to be revealed.
24  Consequently the Law has become our tutor leading to Christ, that we might be declared righteous due to faith.
25  But now that the faith has arrived, we are no longer under a tutor.
26  YOU are all, in fact, sons of God through YOUR faith in Christ Jesus.
27  For all of YOU who were baptized into Christ have put on Christ.
28  There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor freeman, there is neither male nor female;  for YOU are all one [person] in union with Christ Jesus.
29  Moreover, if YOU belong to Christ, YOU are really Abraham’s seed, heirs with reference to a promise.
galatians 4
4  Now I say that as long as the heir is a babe he does not differ at all from a slave, lord of all things though he is,
2  but he is under men in charge and under stewards until the day his father appointed beforehand.
3  Likewise we also, when we were babes, continued enslaved by the elementary things belonging to the world.
4  But when the full limit of the time arrived, God sent forth his Son, who came to be out of a woman and who came to be under law,
5  that he might release by purchase those under law, that we, in turn, might receive the adoption as sons.
6  Now because YOU are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into our hearts and it cries out: “Abba, Father!”
7  So, then, you are no longer a slave but a son;  and if a son, also an heir through God.
8  Nevertheless, when YOU did not know God, then it was that YOU slaved for those who by nature are not gods.
9  But now that YOU have come to know God, or rather now that YOU have come to be known by God, how is it that YOU are turning back again to the weak and beggarly elementary things and want to slave for them over again?
10  YOU are scrupulously observing days and months and seasons and years.
11  I fear for YOU, that somehow I have toiled to no purpose respecting YOU.
12  Brothers, I beg YOU, Become as I am, because I used to be also as YOU are. YOU did me no wrong.
13  But YOU know that it was through a sickness of my flesh I declared the good news to YOU the first time.
14  And what was a trial to YOU in my flesh, YOU did not treat with contempt or spit at in disgust;  but YOU received me like an angel of God, like Christ Jesus.
15  Where, then, is that happiness YOU had? For I bear YOU witness that, if it had been possible, YOU would have gouged out YOUR eyes and given them to me.
16  Well, then, have I become YOUR enemy because I tell YOU the truth?
17  They zealously seek YOU, not in a fine way, but they want to shut YOU off [from me], that YOU may zealously seek them.
18  However, it is fine for YOU to be zealously sought for in a fine cause at all times, and not only when I am present with YOU,
19  my little children, with whom I am again in childbirth pains until Christ is formed in YOU.
20  But I could wish to be present with YOU just now and to speak in a different way, because I am perplexed over YOU.
21  Tell me, YOU who want to be under law, Do YOU not hear the Law?
22  For example, it is written that Abraham acquired two sons, one by the servant girl and one by the free woman; 
23  but the one by the servant girl was actually born in the manner of flesh, the other by the free woman through a promise.
24  These things stand as a symbolic drama;  for these [women] mean two covenants, the one from Mount Sinai, which brings forth children for slavery, and which is Hagar.
25  Now this Hagar means Sinai, a mountain in Arabia, and she corresponds with the Jerusalem today, for she is in slavery with her children.
26  But the Jerusalem above is free, and she is our mother.
27  For it is written: “Be glad, you barren woman who does not give birth;  break out and cry aloud, you woman who does not have childbirth pains;  for the children of the desolate woman are more numerous than [those] of her who has the husband.”
28  Now we, brothers, are children belonging to the promise the same as Isaac was.
29  But just as then the one born in the manner of flesh began persecuting the one born in the manner of spirit, so also now.
30  Nevertheless, what does the Scripture say? “Drive out the servant girl and her son, for by no means shall the son of the servant girl be an heir with the son of the free woman.”
31  Wherefore, brothers, we are children, not of a servant girl, but of the free woman.
galatians 5
5  For such freedom Christ set us free. Therefore stand fast, and do not let yourselves be confined again in a yoke of slavery.
2  See! I, Paul, am telling YOU that if YOU become circumcised, Christ will be of no benefit to YOU.
3  Moreover, I bear witness again to every man getting circumcised that he is under obligation to perform the whole Law.
4  YOU are parted from Christ, whoever YOU are that try to be declared righteous by means of law;  YOU have fallen away from his undeserved kindness.
5  For our part we by spirit are eagerly waiting for the hoped-for righteousness as a result of faith.
6  For as regards Christ Jesus neither circumcision is of any value nor is uncircumcision, but faith operating through love [is].
7  YOU were running well. Who hindered YOU from keeping on obeying the truth?
8  This sort of persuasion is not from the One calling YOU.
9  A little leaven ferments the whole lump.
10  I am confident about YOU who are in union with [the] Lord that YOU will not come to think otherwise;  but the one who is causing YOU trouble will bear [his] judgment, no matter who he may be.
11  As for me, brothers, if I am still preaching circumcision, why am I still being persecuted? Then, indeed, the stumbling block of the torture stake has been abolished.
12  I wish the men who are trying to overturn YOU would even get themselves emasculated.
13  YOU were, of course, called for freedom, brothers;  only do not use this freedom as an inducement for the flesh, but through love slave for one another.
14  For the entire Law stands fulfilled in one saying, namely: “You must love your neighbor as yourself.”
15  If, though, YOU keep on biting and devouring one another, look out that YOU do not get annihilated by one another.
16  But I say, Keep walking by spirit and YOU will carry out no fleshly desire at all.
17  For the flesh is against the spirit in its desire, and the spirit against the flesh;  for these are opposed to each other, so that the very things that YOU would like to do YOU do not do.
18  Furthermore, if YOU are being led by spirit, YOU are not under law.
19  Now the works of the flesh are manifest, and they are fornication, uncleanness, loose conduct,
20  idolatry, practice of spiritism, enmities, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, contentions, divisions, sects,
21  envies, drunken bouts, revelries, and things like these. As to these things I am forewarning YOU, the same way as I did forewarn YOU, that those who practice such things will not inherit God’s kingdom.
22  On the other hand, the fruitage of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness, faith,
23  mildness, self-control. Against such things there is no law.
24  Moreover, those who belong to Christ Jesus impaled the flesh together with its passions and desires.
25  If we are living by spirit, let us go on walking orderly also by spirit.
26  Let us not become egotistical, stirring up competition with one another, envying one another.
galatians 6
6  Brothers, even though a man takes some false step before he is aware of it, YOU who have spiritual qualifications try to readjust such a man in a spirit of mildness, as you each keep an eye on yourself, for fear you also may be tempted.
2  Go on carrying the burdens of one another, and thus fulfill the law of the Christ.
3  For if anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he is deceiving his own mind.
4  But let each one prove what his own work is, and then he will have cause for exultation in regard to himself alone, and not in comparison with the other person.
5  For each one will carry his own load.
6  Moreover, let anyone who is being orally taught the word share in all good things with the one who gives such oral teaching.
7  Do not be misled: God is not one to be mocked. For whatever a man is sowing, this he will also reap; 
8  because he who is sowing with a view to his flesh will reap corruption from his flesh, but he who is sowing with a view to the spirit will reap everlasting life from the spirit.
9  So let us not give up in doing what is fine, for in due season we shall reap if we do not tire out.
10  Really, then, as long as we have time favorable for it, let us work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to [us] in the faith.
11  SEE with what large letters I have written YOU with my own hand.
12  All those who want to make a pleasing appearance in the flesh are the ones that try to compel YOU to get circumcised, only that they may not be persecuted for the torture stake of the Christ, Jesus.
13  For not even do those who are getting circumcised keep the Law themselves, but they want YOU to be circumcised that they may have cause for boasting in YOUR flesh.
14  Never may it occur that I should boast, except in the torture stake of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom the world has been impaled to me and I to the world.
15  For neither is circumcision anything nor is uncircumcision, but a new creation [is something].
16  And all those who will walk orderly by this rule of conduct, upon them be peace and mercy, even upon the Israel of God.
17  Henceforth let no one be making trouble for me, for I am carrying on my body the brand marks [of a slave] of Jesus.
18  The undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ [be] with the spirit YOU [show], brothers. Amen.
ephesians 1
1  Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, to the holy ones who are [in Ephesus] and faithful ones in union with Christ Jesus:
2  May YOU have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and [the] Lord Jesus Christ.
3  Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for he has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in union with Christ,
4  just as he chose us in union with him before the founding of the world, that we should be holy and without blemish before him in love.
5  For he foreordained us to the adoption through Jesus Christ as sons to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will,
6  in praise of his glorious undeserved kindness which he kindly conferred upon us by means of [his] loved one.
7  By means of him we have the release by ransom through the blood of that one, yes, the forgiveness of [our] trespasses, according to the riches of his undeserved kindness.
8  This he caused to abound toward us in all wisdom and good sense,
9  in that he made known to us the sacred secret of his will. It is according to his good pleasure which he purposed in himself
10  for an administration at the full limit of the appointed times, namely, to gather all things together again in the Christ, the things in the heavens and the things on the earth. [Yes,] in him,
11  in union with whom we were also assigned as heirs, in that we were foreordained according to the purpose of him who operates all things according to the way his will counsels,
12  that we should serve for the praise of his glory, we who have been first to hope in the Christ.
13  But YOU also hoped in him after YOU heard the word of truth, the good news about YOUR salvation. By means of him also, after YOU believed, YOU were sealed with the promised holy spirit,
14  which is a token in advance of our inheritance, for the purpose of releasing by a ransom [God’s] own possession, to his glorious praise.
15  That is why I also, since I have heard of the faith YOU have in the Lord Jesus and toward all the holy ones,
16  do not cease giving thanks for YOU. I continue mentioning YOU in my prayers,
17  that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give YOU a spirit of wisdom and of revelation in the accurate knowledge of him; 
18  the eyes of YOUR heart having been enlightened, that YOU may know what is the hope to which he called YOU, what the glorious riches are which he holds as an inheritance for the holy ones,
19  and what the surpassing greatness of his power is toward us believers. It is according to the operation of the mightiness of his strength,
20  with which he has operated in the case of the Christ when he raised him up from the dead and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly places,
21  far above every government and authority and power and lordship and every name named, not only in this system of things, but also in that to come.
22  He also subjected all things under his feet, and made him head over all things to the congregation,
23  which is his body, the fullness of him who fills up all things in all.
ephesians 2
2  Furthermore, [it is] YOU [God made alive] though YOU were dead in YOUR trespasses and sins,
2  in which YOU at one time walked according to the system of things of this world, according to the ruler of the authority of the air, the spirit that now operates in the sons of disobedience.
3  Yes, among them we all at one time conducted ourselves in harmony with the desires of our flesh, doing the things willed by the flesh and the thoughts, and we were naturally children of wrath even as the rest.
4  But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love with which he loved us,
5  made us alive together with the Christ, even when we were dead in trespasses—by undeserved kindness YOU have been saved—
6  and he raised us up together and seated us together in the heavenly places in union with Christ Jesus,
7  that in the coming systems of things there might be demonstrated the surpassing riches of his undeserved kindness in his graciousness toward us in union with Christ Jesus.
8  By this undeserved kindness, indeed, YOU have been saved through faith;  and this not owing to YOU, it is God’s gift.
9  No, it is not owing to works, in order that no man should have ground for boasting.
10  For we are a product of his work and were created in union with Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared in advance for us to walk in them.
11  Therefore keep bearing in mind that formerly YOU were people of the nations as to flesh;  “uncircumcision” YOU were called by that which is called “circumcision” made in the flesh with hands—
12  that YOU were at that particular time without Christ, alienated from the state of Israel and strangers to the covenants of the promise, and YOU had no hope and were without God in the world.
13  But now in union with Christ Jesus YOU who were once far off have come to be near by the blood of the Christ.
14  For he is our peace, he who made the two parties one and destroyed the wall in between that fenced them off.
15  By means of his flesh he abolished the enmity, the Law of commandments consisting in decrees, that he might create the two peoples in union with himself into one new man and make peace; 
16  and that he might fully reconcile both peoples in one body to God through the torture stake, because he had killed off the enmity by means of himself.
17  And he came and declared the good news of peace to YOU, the ones far off, and peace to those near,
18  because through him we, both peoples, have the approach to the Father by one spirit.
19  Certainly, therefore, YOU are no longer strangers and alien residents, but YOU are fellow citizens of the holy ones and are members of the household of God,
20  and YOU have been built up upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, while Christ Jesus himself is the foundation cornerstone.
21  In union with him the whole building, being harmoniously joined together, is growing into a holy temple for Jehovah.
22  In union with him YOU, too, are being built up together into a place for God to inhabit by spirit.
ephesians 3
3  On account of this I, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus in behalf of YOU, the people of the nations—
2  if, really, YOU have heard about the stewardship of the undeserved kindness of God that was given me with YOU in view,
3  that by way of a revelation the sacred secret was made known to me, just as I wrote previously in brief.
4  In the face of this YOU, when YOU read this, can realize the comprehension I have in the sacred secret of the Christ.
5  In other generations this [secret] was not made known to the sons of men as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by spirit,
6  namely, that people of the nations should be joint heirs and fellow members of the body and partakers with us of the promise in union with Christ Jesus through the good news.
7  I became a minister of this according to the free gift of the undeserved kindness of God that was given me according to the way his power operates.
8  To me, a man less than the least of all holy ones, this undeserved kindness was given, that I should declare to the nations the good news about the unfathomable riches of the Christ
9  and should make men see how the sacred secret is administered which has from the indefinite past been hidden in God, who created all things.
10  [This was] to the end that now to the governments and the authorities in the heavenly places there might be made known through the congregation the greatly diversified wisdom of God,
11  according to the eternal purpose that he formed in connection with the Christ, Jesus our Lord,
12  by means of whom we have this freeness of speech and an approach with confidence through our faith in him.
13  Wherefore I ask YOU not to give up on account of these tribulations of mine in YOUR behalf, for these mean glory for YOU.
14  On account of this I bend my knees to the Father,
15  to whom every family in heaven and on earth owes its name,
16  to the end that he may grant YOU according to the riches of his glory to be made mighty in the man YOU are inside with power through his spirit,
17  to have the Christ dwell through [YOUR] faith in YOUR hearts with love;  that YOU may be rooted and established on the foundation,
18  in order that YOU may be thoroughly able to grasp mentally with all the holy ones what is the breadth and length and height and depth,
19  and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge, that YOU may be filled with all the fullness that God gives.
20  Now to the one who can, according to his power which is operating in us, do more than superabundantly beyond all the things we ask or conceive,
21  to him be the glory by means of the congregation and by means of Christ Jesus to all generations forever and ever. Amen.
ephesians 4
4  I, therefore, the prisoner in [the] Lord, entreat YOU to walk worthily of the calling with which YOU were called,
2  with complete lowliness of mind and mildness, with long-suffering, putting up with one another in love,
3  earnestly endeavoring to observe the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace.
4  One body there is, and one spirit, even as YOU were called in the one hope to which YOU were called; 
5  one Lord, one faith, one baptism; 
6  one God and Father of all [persons], who is over all and through all and in all.
7  Now to each one of us undeserved kindness was given according to how the Christ measured out the free gift.
8  Wherefore he says: “When he ascended on high he carried away captives;  he gave gifts [in] men.”
9  Now the expression “he ascended,” what does it mean but that he also descended into the lower regions, that is, the earth?
10  The very one that descended is also the one that ascended far above all the heavens, that he might give fullness to all things.
11  And he gave some as apostles, some as prophets, some as evangelizers, some as shepherds and teachers,
12  with a view to the readjustment of the holy ones, for ministerial work, for the building up of the body of the Christ,
13  until we all attain to the oneness in the faith and in the accurate knowledge of the Son of God, to a full-grown man, to the measure of stature that belongs to the fullness of the Christ; 
14  in order that we should no longer be babes, tossed about as by waves and carried hither and thither by every wind of teaching by means of the trickery of men, by means of cunning in contriving error.
15  But speaking the truth, let us by love grow up in all things into him who is the head, Christ.
16  From him all the body, by being harmoniously joined together and being made to cooperate through every joint that gives what is needed, according to the functioning of each respective member in due measure, makes for the growth of the body for the building up of itself in love.
17  This, therefore, I say and bear witness to in [the] Lord, that YOU no longer go on walking just as the nations also walk in the unprofitableness of their minds,
18  while they are in darkness mentally, and alienated from the life that belongs to God, because of the ignorance that is in them, because of the insensibility of their hearts.
19  Having come to be past all moral sense, they gave themselves over to loose conduct to work uncleanness of every sort with greediness.
20  But YOU did not learn the Christ to be so,
21  provided, indeed, that YOU heard him and were taught by means of him, just as truth is in Jesus,
22  that YOU should put away the old personality which conforms to YOUR former course of conduct and which is being corrupted according to his deceptive desires; 
23  but that YOU should be made new in the force actuating YOUR mind,
24  and should put on the new personality which was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty.
25  Wherefore, now that YOU have put away falsehood, speak truth each one of YOU with his neighbor, because we are members belonging to one another.
26  Be wrathful, and yet do not sin;  let the sun not set with YOU in a provoked state,
27  neither allow place for the Devil.
28  Let the stealer steal no more, but rather let him do hard work, doing with his hands what is good work, that he may have something to distribute to someone in need.
29  Let a rotten saying not proceed out of YOUR mouth, but whatever saying is good for building up as the need may be, that it may impart what is favorable to the hearers.
30  Also, do not be grieving God’s holy spirit, with which YOU have been sealed for a day of releasing by ransom.
31  Let all malicious bitterness and anger and wrath and screaming and abusive speech be taken away from YOU along with all badness.
32  But become kind to one another, tenderly compassionate, freely forgiving one another just as God also by Christ freely forgave YOU.
ephesians 5
5  Therefore, become imitators of God, as beloved children,
2  and go on walking in love, just as the Christ also loved YOU and delivered himself up for YOU as an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling odor.
3  Let fornication and uncleanness of every sort or greediness not even be mentioned among YOU, just as it befits holy people; 
4  neither shameful conduct nor foolish talking nor obscene jesting, things which are not becoming, but rather the giving of thanks.
5  For YOU know this, recognizing it for yourselves, that no fornicator or unclean person or greedy person—which means being an idolater—has any inheritance in the kingdom of the Christ and of God.
6  Let no man deceive YOU with empty words, for because of the aforesaid things the wrath of God is coming upon the sons of disobedience.
7  Therefore do not become partakers with them; 
8  for YOU were once darkness, but YOU are now light in connection with [the] Lord. Go on walking as children of light,
9  for the fruitage of the light consists of every sort of goodness and righteousness and truth.
10  Keep on making sure of what is acceptable to the Lord; 
11  and quit sharing with [them] in the unfruitful works that belong to the darkness, but, rather, even be reproving [them],
12  for the things that take place in secret by them it is shameful even to relate.
13  Now all the things that are being reproved are made manifest by the light, for everything that is being made manifest is light.
14  Wherefore he says: “Awake, O sleeper, and arise from the dead, and the Christ will shine upon you.”
15  So keep strict watch that how YOU walk is not as unwise but as wise [persons],
16  buying out the opportune time for yourselves, because the days are wicked.
17  On this account cease becoming unreasonable, but go on perceiving what the will of Jehovah is.
18  Also, do not be getting drunk with wine, in which there is debauchery, but keep getting filled with spirit,
19  speaking to yourselves with psalms and praises to God and spiritual songs, singing and accompanying yourselves with music in YOUR hearts to Jehovah,
20  in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ giving thanks always for all things to our God and Father.
21  Be in subjection to one another in fear of Christ.
22  Let wives be in subjection to their husbands as to the Lord,
23  because a husband is head of his wife as the Christ also is head of the congregation, he being a savior of [this] body.
24  In fact, as the congregation is in subjection to the Christ, so let wives also be to their husbands in everything.
25  Husbands, continue loving YOUR wives, just as the Christ also loved the congregation and delivered up himself for it,
26  that he might sanctify it, cleansing it with the bath of water by means of the word,
27  that he might present the congregation to himself in its splendor, not having a spot or a wrinkle or any of such things, but that it should be holy and without blemish.
28  In this way husbands ought to be loving their wives as their own bodies. He who loves his wife loves himself,
29  for no man ever hated his own flesh;  but he feeds and cherishes it, as the Christ also does the congregation,
30  because we are members of his body.
31  “For this reason a man will leave [his] father and [his] mother and he will stick to his wife, and the two will become one flesh.”
32  This sacred secret is great. Now I am speaking with respect to Christ and the congregation.
33  Nevertheless, also, let each one of YOU individually so love his wife as he does himself;  on the other hand, the wife should have deep respect for her husband.
ephesians 6
6  Children, be obedient to YOUR parents in union with [the] Lord, for this is righteous:
2  “Honor your father and [your] mother”;  which is the first command with a promise:
3  “That it may go well with you and you may endure a long time on the earth.”
4  And YOU, fathers, do not be irritating YOUR children, but go on bringing them up in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.
5  YOU slaves, be obedient to those who are [YOUR] masters in a fleshly sense, with fear and trembling in the sincerity of YOUR hearts, as to the Christ,
6  not by way of eye-service as men pleasers, but as Christ’s slaves, doing the will of God whole-souled.
7  Be slaves with good inclinations, as to Jehovah, and not to men,
8  for YOU know that each one, whatever good he may do, will receive this back from Jehovah, whether he be slave or freeman.
9  Also, YOU masters, keep doing the same things to them, letting up on the threatening, for YOU know that the Master of both them and YOU is in the heavens, and there is no partiality with him.
10  Finally, go on acquiring power in [the] Lord and in the mightiness of his strength.
11  Put on the complete suit of armor from God that YOU may be able to stand firm against the machinations of the Devil; 
12  because we have a wrestling, not against blood and flesh, but against the governments, against the authorities, against the world rulers of this darkness, against the wicked spirit forces in the heavenly places.
13  On this account take up the complete suit of armor from God, that YOU may be able to resist in the wicked day and, after YOU have done all things thoroughly, to stand firm.
14  Stand firm, therefore, with YOUR loins girded about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness,
15  and with YOUR feet shod with the equipment of the good news of peace.
16  Above all things, take up the large shield of faith, with which YOU will be able to quench all the wicked one’s burning missiles.
17  Also, accept the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, that is, God’s word,
18  while with every form of prayer and supplication YOU carry on prayer on every occasion in spirit. And to that end keep awake with all constancy and with supplication in behalf of all the holy ones,
19  also for me, that ability to speak may be given me with the opening of my mouth, with freeness of speech to make known the sacred secret of the good news,
20  for which I am acting as an ambassador in chains;  that I may speak in connection with it with boldness as I ought to speak.
21  Now in order that YOU may also know about my affairs, as to how I am doing, Tychicus, a beloved brother and faithful minister in [the] Lord, will make everything known to YOU.
22  I am sending him to YOU for this very purpose, that YOU may know of the things having to do with us and that he may comfort YOUR hearts.
23  May the brothers have peace and love with faith from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
24  May the undeserved kindness be with all those loving our Lord Jesus Christ in incorruptness.
philippians 1
1  Paul and Timothy, slaves of Christ Jesus, to all the holy ones in union with Christ Jesus who are in Philippi, along with overseers and ministerial servants:
2  May YOU have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and [the] Lord Jesus Christ.
3  I thank my God always upon every remembrance of YOU
4  in every supplication of mine for all of YOU, as I offer my supplication with joy,
5  because of the contribution YOU have made to the good news from the first day until this moment.
6  For I am confident of this very thing, that he who started a good work in YOU will carry it to completion until the day of Jesus Christ.
7  It is altogether right for me to think this regarding all of YOU, on account of my having YOU in my heart, all of YOU being sharers with me in the undeserved kindness, both in my [prison] bonds and in the defending and legally establishing of the good news.
8  For God is my witness of how I am yearning for all of YOU in such tender affection as Christ Jesus has.
9  And this is what I continue praying, that YOUR love may abound yet more and more with accurate knowledge and full discernment; 
10  that YOU may make sure of the more important things, so that YOU may be flawless and not be stumbling others up to the day of Christ,
11  and may be filled with righteous fruit, which is through Jesus Christ, to God’s glory and praise.
12  Now I desire YOU to know, brothers, that my affairs have turned out for the advancement of the good news rather than otherwise,
13  so that my bonds have become public knowledge in association with Christ among all the Praetorian Guard and all the rest; 
14  and most of the brothers in [the] Lord, feeling confidence by reason of my [prison] bonds, are showing all the more courage to speak the word of God fearlessly.
15  True, some are preaching the Christ through envy and rivalry, but others also through goodwill.
16  The latter are publicizing the Christ out of love, for they know I am set here for the defense of the good news; 
17  but the former do it out of contentiousness, not with a pure motive, for they are supposing to stir up tribulation [for me] in my [prison] bonds.
18  What then? [Nothing,] except that in every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is being publicized, and in this I rejoice. In fact, I will also keep on rejoicing,
19  for I know this will result in my salvation through YOUR supplication and a supply of the spirit of Jesus Christ,
20  in harmony with my eager expectation and hope that I shall not be ashamed in any respect, but that in all freeness of speech Christ will, as always before, so now be magnified by means of my body, whether through life or through death.
21  For in my case to live is Christ, and to die, gain.
22  Now if it be to live on in the flesh, this is a fruitage of my work—and yet which thing to select I do not make known.
23  I am under pressure from these two things;  but what I do desire is the releasing and the being with Christ, for this, to be sure, is far better.
24  However, for me to remain in the flesh is more necessary on YOUR account.
25  So, being confident of this, I know I shall remain and shall abide with all of YOU for YOUR advancement and the joy that belongs to [YOUR] faith,
26  so that YOUR exultation may overflow in Christ Jesus by reason of me through my presence again with YOU.
27  Only behave in a manner worthy of the good news about the Christ, in order that, whether I come and see YOU or be absent, I may hear about the things which concern YOU, that YOU are standing firm in one spirit, with one soul striving side by side for the faith of the good news,
28  and in no respect being frightened by YOUR opponents. This very thing is a proof of destruction for them, but of salvation for YOU;  and this [indication] is from God,
29  because to YOU the privilege was given in behalf of Christ, not only to put YOUR faith in him, but also to suffer in his behalf.
30  For YOU have the same struggle as YOU saw in my case and as YOU now hear about in my case.
philippians 2
2  If, then, there is any encouragement in Christ, if any consolation of love, if any sharing of spirit, if any tender affections and compassions,
2  make my joy full in that YOU are of the same mind and have the same love, being joined together in soul, holding the one thought in mind,
3  doing nothing out of contentiousness or out of egotism, but with lowliness of mind considering that the others are superior to YOU,
4  keeping an eye, not in personal interest upon just YOUR own matters, but also in personal interest upon those of the others.
5  Keep this mental attitude in YOU that was also in Christ Jesus,
6  who, although he was existing in God’s form, gave no consideration to a seizure, namely, that he should be equal to God.
7  No, but he emptied himself and took a slave’s form and came to be in the likeness of men.
8  More than that, when he found himself in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient as far as death, yes, death on a torture stake.
9  For this very reason also God exalted him to a superior position and kindly gave him the name that is above every [other] name,
10  so that in the name of Jesus every knee should bend of those in heaven and those on earth and those under the ground,
11  and every tongue should openly acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father.
12  Consequently, my beloved ones, in the way that YOU have always obeyed, not during my presence only, but now much more readily during my absence, keep working out YOUR own salvation with fear and trembling; 
13  for God is the one that, for the sake of [his] good pleasure, is acting within YOU in order for YOU both to will and to act.
14  Keep doing all things free from murmurings and arguments,
15  that YOU may come to be blameless and innocent, children of God without a blemish in among a crooked and twisted generation, among whom YOU are shining as illuminators in the world,
16  keeping a tight grip on the word of life, that I may have cause for exultation in Christ’s day, that I did not run in vain or work hard in vain.
17  Notwithstanding, even if I am being poured out like a drink offering upon the sacrifice and public service to which faith has led YOU, I am glad and I rejoice with all of YOU.
18  Now in the same way YOU yourselves also be glad and rejoice with me.
19  For my part I am hoping in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to YOU shortly, that I may be a cheerful soul when I get to know about the things pertaining to YOU.
20  For I have no one else of a disposition like his who will genuinely care for the things pertaining to YOU.
21  For all the others are seeking their own interests, not those of Christ Jesus.
22  But YOU know the proof he gave of himself, that like a child with a father he slaved with me in furtherance of the good news.
23  This, therefore, is the man I am hoping to send just as soon as I have seen how things stand concerning me.
24  Indeed, I am confident in [the] Lord that I myself shall also come shortly.
25  However, I consider it necessary to send to YOU Epaphroditus, my brother and fellow worker and fellow soldier, but YOUR envoy and private servant for my need,
26  since he is longing to see all of YOU and is depressed because YOU heard he had fallen sick.
27  Yes, indeed, he fell sick nearly to the point of death;  but God had mercy on him, in fact, not only on him, but also on me, that I should not get grief upon grief.
28  Therefore with the greater haste I am sending him, that on seeing him YOU may rejoice again and I may be the more free from grief.
29  Therefore give him the customary welcome in [the] Lord with all joy;  and keep holding men of that sort dear,
30  because on account of the Lord’s work he came quite near to death, exposing his soul to danger, that he might fully make up for YOUR not being here to render private service to me.
philippians 3
3  Finally, my brothers, continue rejoicing in [the] Lord. To be writing the same things to YOU is not troublesome for me, but it is of safety to YOU.
2  Look out for the dogs, look out for the workers of injury, look out for those who mutilate the flesh.
3  For we are those with the real circumcision, who are rendering sacred service by God’s spirit and have our boasting in Christ Jesus and do not have our confidence in the flesh,
4  though I, if anyone, do have grounds for confidence also in the flesh. If any other man thinks he has grounds for confidence in the flesh, I the more so:
5  circumcised the eighth day, out of the family stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew [born] from Hebrews;  as respects law, a Pharisee; 
6  as respects zeal, persecuting the congregation;  as respects righteousness that is by means of law, one who proved himself blameless.
7  Yet what things were gains to me, these I have considered loss on account of the Christ.
8  Why, for that matter, I do indeed also consider all things to be loss on account of the excelling value of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. On account of him I have taken the loss of all things and I consider them as a lot of refuse, that I may gain Christ
9  and be found in union with him, having, not my own righteousness, which results from law, but that which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness that issues from God on the basis of faith,
10  so as to know him and the power of his resurrection and a sharing in his sufferings, submitting myself to a death like his,
11  [to see] if I may by any means attain to the earlier resurrection from the dead.
12  Not that I have already received it or am already made perfect, but I am pursuing to see if I may also lay hold on that for which I have also been laid hold on by Christ Jesus.
13  Brothers, I do not yet consider myself as having laid hold on [it];  but there is one thing about it: Forgetting the things behind and stretching forward to the things ahead,
14  I am pursuing down toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God by means of Christ Jesus.
15  Let us, then, as many of us as are mature, be of this mental attitude;  and if YOU are mentally inclined otherwise in any respect, God will reveal the above [attitude] to YOU.
16  At any rate, to what extent we have made progress, let us go on walking orderly in this same routine.
17  Unitedly become imitators of me, brothers, and keep YOUR eye on those who are walking in a way that accords with the example YOU have in us.
18  For there are many, I used to mention them often but now I mention them also with weeping, who are walking as the enemies of the torture stake of the Christ,
19  and their finish is destruction, and their god is their belly, and their glory consists in their shame, and they have their minds upon things on the earth.
20  As for us, our citizenship exists in the heavens, from which place also we are eagerly waiting for a savior, the Lord Jesus Christ,
21  who will refashion our humiliated body to be conformed to his glorious body according to the operation of the power that he has, even to subject all things to himself.
philippians 4
4  Consequently, my brothers beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, stand firm in this way in [the] Lord, beloved ones.
2  Euodia I exhort and Syntyche I exhort to be of the same mind in [the] Lord.
3  Yes, I request you too, genuine yokefellow, keep assisting these [women] who have striven side by side with me in the good news along with Clement as well as the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life.
4  Always rejoice in [the] Lord. Once more I will say, Rejoice!
5  Let YOUR reasonableness become known to all men. The Lord is near.
6  Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving let YOUR petitions be made known to God; 
7  and the peace of God that excels all thought will guard YOUR hearts and YOUR mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.
8  Finally, brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things are of serious concern, whatever things are righteous, whatever things are chaste, whatever things are lovable, whatever things are well spoken of, whatever virtue there is and whatever praiseworthy thing there is, continue considering these things.
9  The things that YOU learned as well as accepted and heard and saw in connection with me, practice these;  and the God of peace will be with you.
10  I do rejoice greatly in [the] Lord that now at last YOU have revived YOUR thinking in my behalf, to which YOU were really giving thought, but YOU lacked opportunity.
11  Not that I am speaking with regard to being in want, for I have learned, in whatever circumstances I am, to be self-sufficient.
12  I know indeed how to be low [on provisions], I know indeed how to have an abundance. In everything and in all circumstances I have learned the secret of both how to be full and how to hunger, both how to have an abundance and how to suffer want.
13  For all things I have the strength by virtue of him who imparts power to me.
14  Nevertheless, YOU acted well in becoming sharers with me in my tribulation.
15  In fact, YOU Philippians, also know that at [the] start of declaring the good news, when I departed from Macedonia, not a congregation took a share with me in the matter of giving and receiving, except YOU alone; 
16  because, even in Thessalonica, YOU sent something to me both once and a second time for my need.
17  Not that I am earnestly seeking the gift, but that I am earnestly seeking the fruitage that brings more credit to YOUR account.
18  However, I have all things in full and have an abundance. I am filled, now that I have received from Epaphroditus the things from YOU, a sweet-smelling odor, an acceptable sacrifice, well-pleasing to God.
19  In turn, my God will fully supply all YOUR need to the extent of his riches in glory by means of Christ Jesus.
20  Now to our God and Father be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
21  Give my greetings to every holy one in union with Christ Jesus. The brothers who are with me send YOU their greetings.
22  All the holy ones, but especially those of the household of Caesar, send YOU their greetings.
23  The undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus Christ [be] with the spirit YOU [show].
colossians 1
1  Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will, and Timothy [our] brother
2  to the holy ones and faithful brothers in union with Christ at Colossae: May YOU have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father.
3  We thank God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ always when we pray for YOU,
4  since we heard of YOUR faith in connection with Christ Jesus and the love YOU have for all the holy ones
5  because of the hope that is being reserved for YOU in the heavens. This [hope] YOU heard of before by the telling of the truth of that good news
6  which has presented itself to YOU, even as it is bearing fruit and increasing in all the world just as [it is doing] also among YOU, from the day YOU heard and accurately knew the undeserved kindness of God in truth.
7  That is what YOU have learned from Epaphras our beloved fellow slave, who is a faithful minister of the Christ on our behalf,
8  who also disclosed to us YOUR love in a spiritual way.
9  That is also why we, from the day we heard [of it], have not ceased praying for YOU and asking that YOU may be filled with the accurate knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual comprehension,
10  in order to walk worthily of Jehovah to the end of fully pleasing [him] as YOU go on bearing fruit in every good work and increasing in the accurate knowledge of God,
11  being made powerful with all power to the extent of his glorious might so as to endure fully and be long-suffering with joy,
12  thanking the Father who rendered YOU suitable for YOUR participation in the inheritance of the holy ones in the light.
13  He delivered us from the authority of the darkness and transferred us into the kingdom of the Son of his love,
14  by means of whom we have our release by ransom, the forgiveness of our sins.
15  He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation; 
16  because by means of him all [other] things were created in the heavens and upon the earth, the things visible and the things invisible, no matter whether they are thrones or lordships or governments or authorities. All [other] things have been created through him and for him.
17  Also, he is before all [other] things and by means of him all [other] things were made to exist,
18  and he is the head of the body, the congregation. He is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that he might become the one who is first in all things; 
19  because [God] saw good for all fullness to dwell in him,
20  and through him to reconcile again to himself all [other] things by making peace through the blood [he shed] on the torture stake, no matter whether they are the things upon the earth or the things in the heavens.
21  Indeed, YOU who were once alienated and enemies because YOUR minds were on the works that were wicked,
22  he now has again reconciled by means of that one’s fleshly body through [his] death, in order to present YOU holy and unblemished and open to no accusation before him,
23  provided, of course, that YOU continue in the faith, established on the foundation and steadfast and not being shifted away from the hope of that good news which YOU heard, and which was preached in all creation that is under heaven. Of this [good news] I Paul became a minister.
24  I am now rejoicing in my sufferings for YOU, and I, in my turn, am filling up what is lacking of the tribulations of the Christ in my flesh on behalf of his body, which is the congregation.
25  I became a minister of this [congregation] in accordance with the stewardship from God which was given me in YOUR interest to preach the word of God fully,
26  the sacred secret that was hidden from the past systems of things and from the past generations. But now it has been made manifest to his holy ones,
27  to whom God has been pleased to make known what are the glorious riches of this sacred secret among the nations. It is Christ in union with YOU, the hope of [his] glory.
28  He is the one we are publicizing, admonishing every man and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man complete in union with Christ.
29  To this end I am indeed working hard, exerting myself in accordance with the operation of him and which is at work in me with power.
colossians 2
2  For I want YOU to realize how great a struggle I am having in behalf of YOU and of those at Laodicea and of all those who have not seen my face in the flesh,
2  that their hearts may be comforted, that they may be harmoniously joined together in love and with a view to all the riches of the full assurance of [their] understanding, with a view to an accurate knowledge of the sacred secret of God, namely, Christ.
3  Carefully concealed in him are all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge.
4  This I am saying that no man may delude YOU with persuasive arguments.
5  For though I am absent in the flesh, all the same I am with YOU in the spirit, rejoicing and beholding YOUR good order and the firmness of YOUR faith toward Christ.
6  Therefore, as YOU have accepted Christ Jesus the Lord, go on walking in union with him,
7  rooted and being built up in him and being stabilized in the faith, just as YOU were taught, overflowing with [faith] in thanksgiving.
8  Look out: perhaps there may be someone who will carry YOU off as his prey through the philosophy and empty deception according to the tradition of men, according to the elementary things of the world and not according to Christ; 
9  because it is in him that all the fullness of the divine quality dwells bodily.
10  And so YOU are possessed of a fullness by means of him, who is the head of all government and authority.
11  By relationship with him YOU were also circumcised with a circumcision performed without hands by the stripping off the body of the flesh, by the circumcision that belongs to the Christ,
12  for YOU were buried with him in [his] baptism, and by relationship with him YOU were also raised up together through [YOUR] faith in the operation of God, who raised him up from the dead.
13  Furthermore, though YOU were dead in YOUR trespasses and in the uncircumcised state of YOUR flesh, [God] made YOU alive together with him. He kindly forgave us all our trespasses
14  and blotted out the handwritten document against us, which consisted of decrees and which was in opposition to us;  and He has taken it out of the way by nailing it to the torture stake.
15  Stripping the governments and the authorities bare, he exhibited them in open public as conquered, leading them in a triumphal procession by means of it.
16  Therefore let no man judge YOU in eating and drinking or in respect of a festival or of an observance of the new moon or of a sabbath; 
17  for those things are a shadow of the things to come, but the reality belongs to the Christ.
18  Let no man deprive YOU of the prize who takes delight in a [mock] humility and a form of worship of the angels, “taking his stand on” the things he has seen, puffed up without proper cause by his fleshly frame of mind,
19  whereas he is not holding fast to the head, to the one from whom all the body, being supplied and harmoniously joined together by means of its joints and ligaments, goes on growing with the growth that God gives.
20  If YOU died together with Christ toward the elementary things of the world, why do YOU, as if living in the world, further subject yourselves to the decrees:
21  “Do not handle, nor taste, nor touch,”
22  respecting things that are all destined to destruction by being used up, in accordance with the commands and teachings of men?
23  Those very things are, indeed, possessed of an appearance of wisdom in a self-imposed form of worship and [mock] humility, a severe treatment of the body;  but they are of no value in combating the satisfying of the flesh.
colossians 3
3  If, however, YOU were raised up with the Christ, go on seeking the things above, where the Christ is seated at the right hand of God.
2  Keep YOUR minds fixed on the things above, not on the things upon the earth.
3  For YOU died, and YOUR life has been hidden with the Christ in union with God.
4  When the Christ, our life, is made manifest, then YOU also will be made manifest with him in glory.
5  Deaden, therefore, YOUR body members that are upon the earth as respects fornication, uncleanness, sexual appetite, hurtful desire, and covetousness, which is idolatry.
6  On account of those things the wrath of God is coming.
7  In those very things YOU, too, once walked when YOU used to live in them.
8  But now really put them all away from YOU, wrath, anger, badness, abusive speech, and obscene talk out of YOUR mouth.
9  Do not be lying to one another. Strip off the old personality with its practices,
10  and clothe yourselves with the new [personality], which through accurate knowledge is being made new according to the image of the One who created it,
11  where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, foreigner, Scythian, slave, freeman, but Christ is all things and in all.
12  Accordingly, as God’s chosen ones, holy and loved, clothe yourselves with the tender affections of compassion, kindness, lowliness of mind, mildness, and long-suffering.
13  Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely if anyone has a cause for complaint against another. Even as Jehovah freely forgave YOU, so do YOU also.
14  But, besides all these things, [clothe yourselves with] love, for it is a perfect bond of union.
15  Also, let the peace of the Christ control in YOUR hearts, for YOU were, in fact, called to it in one body. And show yourselves thankful.
16  Let the word of the Christ reside in YOU richly in all wisdom. Keep on teaching and admonishing one another with psalms, praises to God, spiritual songs with graciousness, singing in YOUR hearts to Jehovah.
17  And whatever it is that YOU do in word or in work, do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus, thanking God the Father through him.
18  YOU wives, be in subjection to [your] husbands, as it is becoming in [the] Lord.
19  YOU husbands, keep on loving [your] wives and do not be bitterly angry with them.
20  YOU children, be obedient to [your] parents in everything, for this is well-pleasing in [the] Lord.
21  YOU fathers, do not be exasperating your children, so that they do not become downhearted.
22  YOU slaves, be obedient in everything to those who are [your] masters in a fleshly sense, not with acts of eye-service, as men pleasers, but with sincerity of heart, with fear of Jehovah.
23  Whatever YOU are doing, work at it whole-souled as to Jehovah, and not to men,
24  for YOU know that it is from Jehovah YOU will receive the due reward of the inheritance. SLAVE for the Master, Christ.
25  Certainly the one that is doing wrong will receive back what he wrongly did, and there is no partiality.
colossians 4
4  YOU masters, keep dealing out what is righteous and what is fair to [your] slaves, knowing that YOU also have a Master in heaven.
2  Be persevering in prayer, remaining awake in it with thanksgiving,
3  at the same time praying also for us, that God may open a door of utterance to us, to speak the sacred secret about the Christ, for which, in fact, I am in prison bonds; 
4  so that I shall make it manifest as I ought to speak.
5  Go on walking in wisdom toward those on the outside, buying out the opportune time for yourselves.
6  Let YOUR utterance be always with graciousness, seasoned with salt, so as to know how YOU ought to give an answer to each one.
7  All my affairs Tychicus, [my] beloved brother and faithful minister and fellow slave in [the] Lord, will make known to YOU.
8  For the very purpose of YOUR knowing the things having to do with us and that he may comfort YOUR hearts, I am sending him to YOU
9  along with Onesimus, my faithful and beloved brother, who is from among YOU. All the things here they will make known to YOU.
10  Aristarchus my fellow captive sends YOU his greetings, and so does Mark the cousin of Barnabas, (concerning whom YOU received commands to welcome him if ever he comes to YOU,)
11  and Jesus who is called Justus, these being of those circumcised. Only these are my fellow workers for the kingdom of God, and these very ones have become a strengthening aid to me.
12  Epaphras, who is from among YOU, a slave of Christ Jesus, sends YOU his greetings, always exerting himself in YOUR behalf in [his] prayers, that YOU may finally stand complete and with firm conviction in all the will of God.
13  I indeed bear him witness that he puts himself to great effort in behalf of YOU and of those at Laodicea and of those at Hierapolis.
14  Luke the beloved physician sends YOU his greetings, and so does Demas.
15  Give my greetings to the brothers at Laodicea and to Nympha and to the congregation at her house.
16  And when this letter has been read among YOU, arrange that it also be read in the congregation of the Laodiceans and that YOU also read the one from Laodicea.
17  Also, tell Archippus: “Keep watching the ministry which you accepted in [the] Lord, that you fulfill it.”
18  [Here is] my greeting, Paul’s, in my own hand. Continue bearing my [prison] bonds in mind. The undeserved kindness be with YOU.
1 thessalonians 1
1  Paul and Silvanus and Timothy to the congregation of the Thessalonians in union with God the Father and [the] Lord Jesus Christ: May YOU have undeserved kindness and peace.
2  We always thank God when we make mention concerning all of YOU in our prayers,
3  for we bear incessantly in mind YOUR faithful work and [your] loving labor and [your] endurance due to [your] hope in our Lord Jesus Christ before our God and Father.
4  For we know, brothers loved by God, his choosing of YOU,
5  because the good news we preach did not turn up among YOU with speech alone but also with power and with holy spirit and strong conviction, just as YOU know what sort of men we became to YOU for YOUR sakes; 
6  and YOU became imitators of us and of the Lord, seeing that YOU accepted the word under much tribulation with joy of holy spirit,
7  so that YOU came to be an example to all the believers in Macedonia and in Achaia.
8  The fact is, not only has the word of Jehovah sounded forth from YOU in Macedonia and Achaia, but in every place YOUR faith toward God has spread abroad, so that we do not need to say anything.
9  For they themselves keep reporting about the way we first entered in among YOU and how YOU turned to God from [YOUR] idols to slave for a living and true God,
10  and to wait for his Son from the heavens, whom he raised up from the dead, namely, Jesus, who delivers us from the wrath which is coming.
1 thessalonians 2
2  To be sure, YOU yourselves know, brothers, how our visit to YOU has not been without results,
2  but how, after we had first suffered and been insolently treated (just as YOU know) in Philippi, we mustered up boldness by means of our God to speak to YOU the good news of God with a great deal of struggling.
3  For the exhortation we give does not arise from error or from uncleanness or with deceit,
4  but, just as we have been proved by God as fit to be entrusted with the good news, so we speak, as pleasing, not men, but God, who makes proof of our hearts.
5  In fact, at no time have we turned up either with flattering speech, (just as YOU know) or with a false front for covetousness, God is witness!
6  Neither have we been seeking glory from men, no, either from YOU or from others, though we could be an expensive burden as apostles of Christ.
7  To the contrary, we became gentle in the midst of YOU, as when a nursing mother cherishes her own children.
8  So, having a tender affection for YOU, we were well pleased to impart to YOU, not only the good news of God, but also our own souls, because YOU became beloved to us.
9  Certainly YOU bear in mind, brothers, our labor and toil. It was with working night and day, so as not to put an expensive burden upon any one of YOU, that we preached the good news of God to YOU.
10  YOU are witnesses, God is also, how loyal and righteous and unblamable we proved to be to YOU believers.
11  In harmony with that YOU well know how, as a father does his children, we kept exhorting each one of YOU, and consoling and bearing witness to YOU,
12  to the end that YOU should go on walking worthily of God who is calling YOU to his kingdom and glory.
13  Indeed, that is why we also thank God incessantly, because when YOU received God’s word, which YOU heard from us, YOU accepted it, not as the word of men, but, just as it truthfully is, as the word of God, which is also at work in YOU believers.
14  For YOU became imitators, brothers, of the congregations of God that are in Judea in union with Christ Jesus, because YOU also began suffering at the hands of YOUR own countrymen the same things as they also [are suffering] at the hands of the Jews,
15  who killed even the Lord Jesus and the prophets and persecuted us. Furthermore, they are not pleasing God, but are against [the interests of] all men,
16  as they try to hinder us from speaking to people of the nations that these might be saved, with the result that they always fill up the measure of their sins. But his wrath has at length come upon them.
17  As for ourselves, brothers, when we were bereaved of YOU for but a short time, in person, not in heart, we endeavored far more than is usual to see YOUR faces with great desire.
18  For this reason we wanted to come to YOU, yes, I Paul, both once and a second time, but Satan cut across our path.
19  For what is our hope or joy or crown of exultation—why, is it not in fact YOU?—before our Lord Jesus at his presence?
20  YOU certainly are our glory and joy.
1 thessalonians 3
3  Hence, when we could bear it no longer, we saw good to be left alone in Athens; 
2  and we sent Timothy, our brother and God’s minister in the good news about the Christ, in order to make YOU firm and comfort YOU in behalf of YOUR faith,
3  that no one might be swayed by these tribulations. For YOU yourselves know we are appointed to this very thing.
4  In fact, too, when we were with YOU, we used to tell YOU beforehand that we were destined to suffer tribulation, just as it has also happened and as YOU know.
5  That is why, indeed, when I could bear it no longer, I sent to know of YOUR faithfulness, as perhaps in some way the Tempter might have tempted YOU, and our labor might have turned out to be in vain.
6  But Timothy has just now come to us from YOU and given us the good news about YOUR faithfulness and love, and that YOU continue having good remembrance of us always, yearning to see us in the same way, indeed, as we also do YOU.
7  That is why, brothers, we have been comforted over YOU in all our necessity and tribulation through the faithfulness YOU show,
8  because now we live if YOU stand firm in [the] Lord.
9  For what thanksgiving can we render to God concerning YOU in return for all the joy with which we are rejoicing on YOUR account before our God,
10  while night and day we make more than extraordinary supplications to see YOUR faces and to make good the things that are lacking about YOUR faith?
11  Now may our God and Father himself and our Lord Jesus direct our way prosperously to YOU.
12  Moreover, may the Lord cause YOU to increase, yes, make YOU abound, in love to one another and to all, even as we also do to YOU; 
13  to the end that he may make YOUR hearts firm, unblamable in holiness before our God and Father at the presence of our Lord Jesus with all his holy ones.
1 thessalonians 4
4  Finally, brothers, we request YOU and exhort YOU by the Lord Jesus, just as YOU received [the instruction] from us on how YOU ought to walk and please God, just as YOU are in fact walking, that YOU would keep on doing it more fully.
2  For YOU know the orders we gave YOU through the Lord Jesus.
3  For this is what God wills, the sanctifying of YOU, that YOU abstain from fornication; 
4  that each one of YOU should know how to get possession of his own vessel in sanctification and honor,
5  not in covetous sexual appetite such as also those nations have which do not know God; 
6  that no one go to the point of harming and encroach upon the rights of his brother in this matter, because Jehovah is one who exacts punishment for all these things, just as we told YOU beforehand and also gave YOU a thorough witness.
7  For God called us, not with allowance for uncleanness, but in connection with sanctification.
8  So, then, the man that shows disregard is disregarding, not man, but God, who puts his holy spirit in YOU.
9  However, with reference to brotherly love, YOU do not need us to be writing YOU, for YOU yourselves are taught by God to love one another; 
10  and, in fact, YOU are doing it to all the brothers in all of Macedonia. But we exhort YOU, brothers, to go on doing it in fuller measure,
11  and to make it YOUR aim to live quietly and to mind YOUR own business and work with YOUR hands, just as we ordered YOU; 
12  so that YOU may be walking decently as regards people outside and not be needing anything.
13  Moreover, brothers, we do not want YOU to be ignorant concerning those who are sleeping [in death];  that YOU may not sorrow just as the rest also do who have no hope.
14  For if our faith is that Jesus died and rose again, so, too, those who have fallen asleep [in death] through Jesus God will bring with him.
15  For this is what we tell YOU by Jehovah’s word, that we the living who survive to the presence of the Lord shall in no way precede those who have fallen asleep [in death]; 
16  because the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a commanding call, with an archangel’s voice and with God’s trumpet, and those who are dead in union with Christ will rise first.
17  Afterward we the living who are surviving will, together with them, be caught away in clouds to meet the Lord in the air;  and thus we shall always be with [the] Lord.
18  Consequently keep comforting one another with these words.
1 thessalonians 5
5  Now as for the times and the seasons, brothers, YOU need nothing to be written to YOU.
2  For YOU yourselves know quite well that Jehovah’s day is coming exactly as a thief in the night.
3  Whenever it is that they are saying: “Peace and security!” then sudden destruction is to be instantly upon them just as the pang of distress upon a pregnant woman;  and they will by no means escape.
4  But YOU, brothers, YOU are not in darkness, so that that day should overtake YOU as it would thieves,
5  for YOU are all sons of light and sons of day. We belong neither to night nor to darkness.
6  So, then, let us not sleep on as the rest do, but let us stay awake and keep our senses.
7  For those who sleep are accustomed to sleep at night, and those who get drunk are usually drunk at night.
8  But as for us who belong to the day, let us keep our senses and have on the breastplate of faith and love and as a helmet the hope of salvation; 
9  because God assigned us, not to wrath, but to the acquiring of salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ.
10  He died for us, that, whether we stay awake or are asleep, we should live together with him.
11  Therefore keep comforting one another and building one another up, just as YOU are in fact doing.
12  Now we request YOU, brothers, to have regard for those who are working hard among YOU and presiding over YOU in [the] Lord and admonishing YOU; 
13  and to give them more than extraordinary consideration in love because of their work. Be peaceable with one another.
14  On the other hand, we exhort YOU, brothers, admonish the disorderly, speak consolingly to the depressed souls, support the weak, be long-suffering toward all.
15  See that no one renders injury for injury to anyone else, but always pursue what is good toward one another and to all others.
16  Always be rejoicing.
17  Pray incessantly.
18  In connection with everything give thanks. For this is the will of God in union with Christ Jesus respecting YOU.
19  Do not put out the fire of the spirit.
20  Do not treat prophesyings with contempt.
21  Make sure of all things;  hold fast to what is fine.
22  Abstain from every form of wickedness.
23  May the very God of peace sanctify YOU completely. And sound in every respect may the spirit and soul and body of YOU [brothers] be preserved in a blameless manner at the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ.
24  He who is calling YOU is faithful, and he will also do it.
25  Brothers, continue in prayer for us.
26  Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss.
27  I am putting YOU under the solemn obligation by the Lord for this letter to be read to all the brothers.
28  The undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ be with YOU.
2 thessalonians 1
1  Paul and Silvanus and Timothy to the congregation of the Thessalonians in union with God our Father and [the] Lord Jesus Christ:
2  May YOU have undeserved kindness and peace from God the Father and [the] Lord Jesus Christ.
3  We are obligated to give God thanks always for YOU, brothers, as it is fitting, because YOUR faith is growing exceedingly and the love of each and all of YOU is increasing one toward the other.
4  As a result we ourselves take pride in YOU among the congregations of God because of YOUR endurance and faith in all YOUR persecutions and the tribulations that YOU are bearing.
5  This is a proof of the righteous judgment of God, leading to YOUR being counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which YOU are indeed suffering.
6  This takes into account that it is righteous on God’s part to repay tribulation to those who make tribulation for YOU,
7  but, to YOU who suffer tribulation, relief along with us at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his powerful angels
8  in a flaming fire, as he brings vengeance upon those who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus.
9  These very ones will undergo the judicial punishment of everlasting destruction from before the Lord and from the glory of his strength,
10  at the time he comes to be glorified in connection with his holy ones and to be regarded in that day with wonder in connection with all those who exercised faith, because the witness we gave met with faith among YOU.
11  To that very end indeed we always pray for YOU, that our God may count YOU worthy of [his] calling and perform completely all he pleases of goodness and the work of faith with power; 
12  in order that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in YOU, and YOU in union with him, in accord with the undeserved kindness of our God and of the Lord Jesus Christ.
2 thessalonians 2
2  However, brothers, respecting the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered together to him, we request of YOU
2  not to be quickly shaken from YOUR reason nor to be excited either through an inspired expression or through a verbal message or through a letter as though from us, to the effect that the day of Jehovah is here.
3  Let no one seduce YOU in any manner, because it will not come unless the apostasy comes first and the man of lawlessness gets revealed, the son of destruction.
4  He is set in opposition and lifts himself up over everyone who is called “god” or an object of reverence, so that he sits down in the temple of The God, publicly showing himself to be a god.
5  Do YOU not remember that, while I was yet with YOU, I used to tell YOU these things?
6  And so now YOU know the thing that acts as a restraint, with a view to his being revealed in his own due time.
7  True, the mystery of this lawlessness is already at work;  but only till he who is right now acting as a restraint gets to be out of the way.
8  Then, indeed, the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will do away with by the spirit of his mouth and bring to nothing by the manifestation of his presence.
9  But the lawless one’s presence is according to the operation of Satan with every powerful work and lying signs and portents
10  and with every unrighteous deception for those who are perishing, as a retribution because they did not accept the love of the truth that they might be saved.
11  So that is why God lets an operation of error go to them, that they may get to believing the lie,
12  in order that they all may be judged because they did not believe the truth but took pleasure in unrighteousness.
13  However, we are obligated to thank God always for YOU, brothers loved by Jehovah, because God selected YOU from [the] beginning for salvation by sanctifying YOU with spirit and by YOUR faith in the truth.
14  To this very destiny he called YOU through the good news we declare, for the purpose of acquiring the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
15  So, then, brothers, stand firm and maintain YOUR hold on the traditions that YOU were taught, whether it was through a verbal message or through a letter of ours.
16  Moreover, may our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father, who loved us and gave everlasting comfort and good hope by means of undeserved kindness,
17  comfort YOUR hearts and make YOU firm in every good deed and word.
2 thessalonians 3
3  Finally, brothers, carry on prayer for us, that the word of Jehovah may keep moving speedily and being glorified just as it is in fact with YOU; 
2  and that we may be delivered from harmful and wicked men, for faith is not a possession of all people.
3  But the Lord is faithful, and he will make YOU firm and keep YOU from the wicked one.
4  Moreover, we have confidence in [the] Lord regarding YOU, that YOU are doing and will go on doing the things we order.
5  May the Lord continue directing YOUR hearts successfully into the love of God and into the endurance for the Christ.
6  Now we are giving YOU orders, brothers, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, to withdraw from every brother walking disorderly and not according to the tradition YOU received from us.
7  For YOU yourselves know the way YOU ought to imitate us, because we did not behave disorderly among YOU
8  nor did we eat food from anyone free. To the contrary, by labor and toil night and day we were working so as not to impose an expensive burden upon any one of YOU.
9  Not that we do not have authority, but in order that we might offer ourselves as an example to YOU to imitate us.
10  In fact, also, when we were with YOU, we used to give YOU this order: “If anyone does not want to work, neither let him eat.”
11  For we hear certain ones are walking disorderly among YOU, not working at all but meddling with what does not concern them.
12  To such persons we give the order and exhortation in [the] Lord Jesus Christ that by working with quietness they should eat food they themselves earn.
13  For YOUR part, brothers, do not give up in doing right.
14  But if anyone is not obedient to our word through this letter, keep this one marked, stop associating with him, that he may become ashamed.
15  And yet do not be considering him as an enemy, but continue admonishing him as a brother.
16  Now may the Lord of peace himself give YOU peace constantly in every way. The Lord be with all of YOU.
17  [Here is] my greeting, Paul’s, in my own hand, which is a sign in every letter;  this is the way I write.
18  The undeserved kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ be with all of YOU.
1 timothy 1
1  Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus under command of God our Savior and of Christ Jesus, our hope,
2  to Timothy, a genuine child in the faith: May there be undeserved kindness, mercy, peace from God [the] Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
3  Just as I encouraged you to stay in Ephesus when I was about to go my way into Macedonia, so I do now, that you might command certain ones not to teach different doctrine,
4  nor to pay attention to false stories and to genealogies, which end up in nothing, but which furnish questions for research rather than a dispensing of anything by God in connection with faith.
5  Really the objective of this mandate is love out of a clean heart and out of a good conscience and out of faith without hypocrisy.
6  By deviating from these things certain ones have been turned aside into idle talk,
7  wanting to be teachers of law, but not perceiving either the things they are saying or the things about which they are making strong assertions.
8  Now we know that the Law is fine provided one handles it lawfully
9  in the knowledge of this fact, that law is promulgated, not for a righteous man, but for persons lawless and unruly, ungodly and sinners, lacking loving-kindness, and profane, murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, manslayers,
10  fornicators, men who lie with males, kidnappers, liars, false swearers, and whatever other thing is in opposition to the healthful teaching
11  according to the glorious good news of the happy God, with which I was entrusted.
12  I am grateful to Christ Jesus our Lord, who imparted power to me, because he considered me faithful by assigning me to a ministry,
13  although formerly I was a blasphemer and a persecutor and an insolent man. Nevertheless, I was shown mercy, because I was ignorant and acted with a lack of faith.
14  But the undeserved kindness of our Lord abounded exceedingly along with faith and love that is in connection with Christ Jesus.
15  Faithful and deserving of full acceptance is the saying that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. Of these I am foremost.
16  Nevertheless, the reason why I was shown mercy was that by means of me as the foremost case Christ Jesus might demonstrate all his long-suffering for a sample of those who are going to rest their faith on him for everlasting life.
17  Now to the King of eternity, incorruptible, invisible, [the] only God, be honor and glory forever and ever. Amen.
18  This mandate I commit to you, child, Timothy, in accord with the predictions that led directly on to you, that by these you may go on waging the fine warfare; 
19  holding faith and a good conscience, which some have thrust aside and have experienced shipwreck concerning [their] faith.
20  Hymenaeus and Alexander belong to these, and I have handed them over to Satan that they may be taught by discipline not to blaspheme.
1 timothy 2
2  I therefore exhort, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, offerings of thanks, be made concerning all sorts of men,
2  concerning kings and all those who are in high station;  in order that we may go on leading a calm and quiet life with full godly devotion and seriousness.
3  This is fine and acceptable in the sight of our Savior, God,
4  whose will is that all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.
5  For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, a man, Christ Jesus,
6  who gave himself a corresponding ransom for all—[this is] what is to be witnessed to at its own particular times.
7  For the purpose of this witness I was appointed a preacher and an apostle—I am telling the truth, I am not lying—a teacher of nations in the matter of faith and truth.
8  Therefore I desire that in every place the men carry on prayer, lifting up loyal hands, apart from wrath and debates.
9  Likewise I desire the women to adorn themselves in well-arranged dress, with modesty and soundness of mind, not with styles of hair braiding and gold or pearls or very expensive garb,
10  but in the way that befits women professing to reverence God, namely, through good works.
11  Let a woman learn in silence with full submissiveness.
12  I do not permit a woman to teach, or to exercise authority over a man, but to be in silence.
13  For Adam was formed first, then Eve.
14  Also, Adam was not deceived, but the woman was thoroughly deceived and came to be in transgression.
15  However, she will be kept safe through childbearing, provided they continue in faith and love and sanctification along with soundness of mind.
1 timothy 3
3  That statement is faithful. If any man is reaching out for an office of overseer, he is desirous of a fine work.
2  The overseer should therefore be irreprehensible, a husband of one wife, moderate in habits, sound in mind, orderly, hospitable, qualified to teach,
3  not a drunken brawler, not a smiter, but reasonable, not belligerent, not a lover of money,
4  a man presiding over his own household in a fine manner, having children in subjection with all seriousness; 
5  (if indeed any man does not know how to preside over his own household, how will he take care of God’s congregation?)
6  not a newly converted man, for fear that he might get puffed up [with pride] and fall into the judgment passed upon the Devil.
7  Moreover, he should also have a fine testimony from people on the outside, in order that he might not fall into reproach and a snare of the Devil.
8  Ministerial servants should likewise be serious, not double-tongued, not giving themselves to a lot of wine, not greedy of dishonest gain,
9  holding the sacred secret of the faith with a clean conscience.
10  Also, let these be tested as to fitness first, then let them serve as ministers, as they are free from accusation.
11  Women should likewise be serious, not slanderous, moderate in habits, faithful in all things.
12  Let ministerial servants be husbands of one wife, presiding in a fine manner over children and their own households.
13  For the men who minister in a fine manner are acquiring for themselves a fine standing and great freeness of speech in the faith in connection with Christ Jesus.
14  I am writing you these things, though I am hoping to come to you shortly,
15  but in case I am delayed, that you may know how you ought to conduct yourself in God’s household, which is the congregation of [the] living God, a pillar and support of the truth.
16  Indeed, the sacred secret of this godly devotion is admittedly great: ‘He was made manifest in flesh, was declared righteous in spirit, appeared to angels, was preached about among nations, was believed upon in [the] world, was received up in glory.’
1 timothy 4
4  However, the inspired utterance says definitely that in later periods of time some will fall away from the faith, paying attention to misleading inspired utterances and teachings of demons,
2  by the hypocrisy of men who speak lies, marked in their conscience as with a branding iron; 
3  forbidding to marry, commanding to abstain from foods which God created to be partaken of with thanksgiving by those who have faith and accurately know the truth.
4  The reason for this is that every creation of God is fine, and nothing is to be rejected if it is received with thanksgiving,
5  for it is sanctified through God’s word and prayer over [it].
6  By giving these advices to the brothers you will be a fine minister of Christ Jesus, one nourished with the words of the faith and of the fine teaching which you have followed closely.
7  But turn down the false stories which violate what is holy and which old women tell. On the other hand, be training yourself with godly devotion as your aim.
8  For bodily training is beneficial for a little;  but godly devotion is beneficial for all things, as it holds promise of the life now and that which is to come.
9  Faithful and deserving of full acceptance is that statement.
10  For to this end we are working hard and exerting ourselves, because we have rested our hope on a living God, who is a Savior of all sorts of men, especially of faithful ones.
11  Keep on giving these commands and teaching them.
12  Let no man ever look down on your youth. On the contrary, become an example to the faithful ones in speaking, in conduct, in love, in faith, in chasteness.
13  While I am coming, continue applying yourself to public reading, to exhortation, to teaching.
14  Do not be neglecting the gift in you that was given you through a prediction and when the body of older men laid their hands upon you.
15  Ponder over these things;  be absorbed in them, that your advancement may be manifest to all [persons].
16  Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching. Stay by these things, for by doing this you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.
1 timothy 5
5  Do not severely criticize an older man. To the contrary, entreat him as a father, younger men as brothers,
2  older women as mothers, younger women as sisters with all chasteness.
3  Honor widows that are actually widows.
4  But if any widow has children or grandchildren, let these learn first to practice godly devotion in their own household and to keep paying a due compensation to their parents and grandparents, for this is acceptable in God’s sight.
5  Now the woman who is actually a widow and left destitute has put her hope in God and persists in supplications and prayers night and day.
6  But the one that goes in for sensual gratification is dead though she is living.
7  So keep on giving these commands, that they may be irreprehensible.
8  Certainly if anyone does not provide for those who are his own, and especially for those who are members of his household, he has disowned the faith and is worse than a person without faith.
9  Let a widow be put on the list who has become not less than sixty years old, a wife of one husband,
10  having a witness borne to her for fine works, if she reared children, if she entertained strangers, if she washed the feet of holy ones, if she relieved those in tribulation, if she diligently followed every good work.
11  On the other hand, turn down younger widows, for when their sexual impulses have come between them and the Christ, they want to marry,
12  having a judgment because they have disregarded their first [expression of] faith.
13  At the same time they also learn to be unoccupied, gadding about to the houses;  yes, not only unoccupied, but also gossipers and meddlers in other people’s affairs, talking of things they ought not.
14  Therefore I desire the younger widows to marry, to bear children, to manage a household, to give no inducement to the opposer to revile.
15  Already, in fact, some have been turned aside to follow Satan.
16  If any believing woman has widows, let her relieve them, and let the congregation not be under the burden. Then it can relieve those who are actually widows.
17  Let the older men who preside in a fine way be reckoned worthy of double honor, especially those who work hard in speaking and teaching.
18  For the scripture says: “You must not muzzle a bull when it threshes out the grain”;  also: “The workman is worthy of his wages.”
19  Do not admit an accusation against an older man, except only on the evidence of two or three witnesses.
20  Reprove before all onlookers persons who practice sin, that the rest also may have fear.
21  I solemnly charge you before God and Christ Jesus and the chosen angels to keep these things without prejudgment, doing nothing according to a biased leaning.
22  Never lay your hands hastily upon any man;  neither be a sharer in the sins of others;  preserve yourself chaste.
23  Do not drink water any longer, but use a little wine for the sake of your stomach and your frequent cases of sickness.
24  The sins of some men are publicly manifest, leading directly to judgment, but as for other men [their sins] also become manifest later.
25  In the same way also the fine works are publicly manifest and those that are otherwise cannot be kept hid.
1 timothy 6
6  Let as many as are slaves under a yoke keep on considering their owners worthy of full honor, that the name of God and the teaching may never be spoken of injuriously.
2  Moreover, let those having believing owners not look down on them, because they are brothers. On the contrary, let them the more readily be slaves, because those receiving the benefit of their good service are believers and beloved. Keep on teaching these things and giving these exhortations.
3  If any man teaches other doctrine and does not assent to healthful words, those of our Lord Jesus Christ, nor to the teaching that accords with godly devotion,
4  he is puffed up [with pride], not understanding anything, but being mentally diseased over questionings and debates about words. From these things spring envy, strife, abusive speeches, wicked suspicions,
5  violent disputes about trifles on the part of men corrupted in mind and despoiled of the truth, thinking that godly devotion is a means of gain.
6  To be sure, it is a means of great gain, [this] godly devotion along with self-sufficiency.
7  For we have brought nothing into the world, and neither can we carry anything out.
8  So, having sustenance and covering, we shall be content with these things.
9  However, those who are determined to be rich fall into temptation and a snare and many senseless and hurtful desires, which plunge men into destruction and ruin.
10  For the love of money is a root of all sorts of injurious things, and by reaching out for this love some have been led astray from the faith and have stabbed themselves all over with many pains.
11  However, you, O man of God, flee from these things. But pursue righteousness, godly devotion, faith, love, endurance, mildness of temper.
12  Fight the fine fight of the faith, get a firm hold on the everlasting life for which you were called and you offered the fine public declaration in front of many witnesses.
13  In the sight of God, who preserves all things alive, and of Christ Jesus, who as a witness made the fine public declaration before Pontius Pilate, I give you orders
14  that you observe the commandment in a spotless and irreprehensible way until the manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
15  This [manifestation] the happy and only Potentate will show in its own appointed times, [he] the King of those who rule as kings and Lord of those who rule as lords,
16  the one alone having immortality, who dwells in unapproachable light, whom not one of men has seen or can see. To him be honor and might everlasting. Amen.
17  Give orders to those who are rich in the present system of things not to be high-minded, and to rest their hope, not on uncertain riches, but on God, who furnishes us all things richly for our enjoyment; 
18  to work at good, to be rich in fine works, to be liberal, ready to share,
19  safely treasuring up for themselves a fine foundation for the future, in order that they may get a firm hold on the real life.
20  O Timothy, guard what is laid up in trust with you, turning away from the empty speeches that violate what is holy and from the contradictions of the falsely called “knowledge.”
21  For making a show of such [knowledge] some have deviated from the faith. May the undeserved kindness be with YOU people.
2 timothy 1
1  Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through God’s will according to the promise of the life that is in union with Christ Jesus,
2  to Timothy, a beloved child: May there be undeserved kindness, mercy, peace from God [the] Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
3  I am grateful to God, to whom I am rendering sacred service as my forefathers did and with a clean conscience, that I never leave off remembering you in my supplications, night and day
4  longing to see you, as I remember your tears, that I may get filled with joy.
5  For I recollect the faith which is in you without any hypocrisy, and which dwelt first in your grandmother Lois and your mother Eunice, but which I am confident is also in you.
6  For this very cause I remind you to stir up like a fire the gift of God which is in you through the laying of my hands upon you.
7  For God gave us not a spirit of cowardice, but that of power and of love and of soundness of mind.
8  Therefore do not become ashamed of the witness about our Lord, neither of me a prisoner for his sake, but take your part in suffering evil for the good news according to the power of God.
9  He saved us and called us with a holy calling, not by reason of our works, but by reason of his own purpose and undeserved kindness. This was given us in connection with Christ Jesus before times long lasting,
10  but now it has been made clearly evident through the manifestation of our Savior, Christ Jesus, who has abolished death but has shed light upon life and incorruption through the good news,
11  for which I was appointed a preacher and apostle and teacher.
12  For this very cause I am also suffering these things, but I am not ashamed. For I know the one whom I have believed, and I am confident he is able to guard what I have laid up in trust with him until that day.
13  Keep holding the pattern of healthful words that you heard from me with the faith and love that are in connection with Christ Jesus.
14  This fine trust guard through the holy spirit which is dwelling in us.
15  You know this, that all the men in the [district of] Asia have turned away from me. Phygelus and Hermogenes are of that number.
16  May the Lord grant mercy to the household of Onesiphorus, because he often brought me refreshment, and he did not become ashamed of my chains.
17  On the contrary, when he happened to be in Rome, he diligently looked for me and found me.
18  May the Lord grant him to find mercy from Jehovah in that day. And all the services he rendered in Ephesus you know well enough.
2 timothy 2
2  You, therefore, my child, keep on acquiring power in the undeserved kindness that is in connection with Christ Jesus,
2  and the things you heard from me with the support of many witnesses, these things commit to faithful men, who, in turn, will be adequately qualified to teach others.
3  As a fine soldier of Christ Jesus take your part in suffering evil.
4  No man serving as a soldier involves himself in the commercial businesses of life, in order that he may gain the approval of the one who enrolled him as a soldier.
5  Moreover, if anyone contends even in the games, he is not crowned unless he has contended according to the rules.
6  The hardworking farmer must be the first to partake of the fruits.
7  Give constant thought to what I am saying;  the Lord will really give you discernment in all things.
8  Remember that Jesus Christ was raised up from the dead and was of David’s seed, according to the good news I preach; 
9  in connection with which I am suffering evil to the point of [prison] bonds as an evildoer. Nevertheless, the word of God is not bound.
10  On this account I go on enduring all things for the sake of the chosen ones, that they too may obtain the salvation that is in union with Christ Jesus along with everlasting glory.
11  Faithful is the saying: Certainly if we died together, we shall also live together; 
12  if we go on enduring, we shall also rule together as kings;  if we deny, he also will deny us; 
13  if we are unfaithful, he remains faithful, for he cannot deny himself.
14  Keep reminding them of these things, charging them before God as witness, not to fight about words, a thing of no usefulness at all because it overturns those listening.
15  Do your utmost to present yourself approved to God, a workman with nothing to be ashamed of, handling the word of the truth aright.
16  But shun empty speeches that violate what is holy;  for they will advance to more and more ungodliness,
17  and their word will spread like gangrene. Hymenaeus and Philetus are of that number.
18  These very [men] have deviated from the truth, saying that the resurrection has already occurred;  and they are subverting the faith of some.
19  For all that, the solid foundation of God stays standing, having this seal: “Jehovah knows those who belong to him,” and: “Let everyone naming the name of Jehovah renounce unrighteousness.”
20  Now in a large house there are vessels not only of gold and silver but also of wood and earthenware, and some for an honorable purpose but others for a purpose lacking honor.
21  If, therefore, anyone keeps clear of the latter ones, he will be a vessel for an honorable purpose, sanctified, useful to his owner, prepared for every good work.
22  So, flee from the desires incidental to youth, but pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, along with those who call upon the Lord out of a clean heart.
23  Further, turn down foolish and ignorant questionings, knowing they produce fights.
24  But a slave of the Lord does not need to fight, but needs to be gentle toward all, qualified to teach, keeping himself restrained under evil,
25  instructing with mildness those not favorably disposed;  as perhaps God may give them repentance leading to an accurate knowledge of truth,
26  and they may come back to their proper senses out from the snare of the Devil, seeing that they have been caught alive by him for the will of that one.
2 timothy 3
3  But know this, that in the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here.
2  For men will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, self-assuming, haughty, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, disloyal,
3  having no natural affection, not open to any agreement, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, without love of goodness,
4  betrayers, headstrong, puffed up [with pride], lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God,
5  having a form of godly devotion but proving false to its power;  and from these turn away.
6  For from these arise those men who slyly work their way into households and lead as their captives weak women loaded down with sins, led by various desires,
7  always learning and yet never able to come to an accurate knowledge of truth.
8  Now in the way that Jannes and Jambres resisted Moses, so these also go on resisting the truth, men completely corrupted in mind, disapproved as regards the faith.
9  Nevertheless, they will make no further progress, for their madness will be very plain to all, even as the [madness] of those [two men] became.
10  But you have closely followed my teaching, my course of life, my purpose, my faith, my long-suffering, my love, my endurance,
11  my persecutions, my sufferings, the sort of things that happened to me in Antioch, in Iconium, in Lystra, the sort of persecutions I have borne;  and yet out of them all the Lord delivered me.
12  In fact, all those desiring to live with godly devotion in association with Christ Jesus will also be persecuted.
13  But wicked men and impostors will advance from bad to worse, misleading and being misled.
14  You, however, continue in the things that you learned and were persuaded to believe, knowing from what persons you learned them
15  and that from infancy you have known the holy writings, which are able to make you wise for salvation through the faith in connection with Christ Jesus.
16  All Scripture is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching, for reproving, for setting things straight, for disciplining in righteousness,
17  that the man of God may be fully competent, completely equipped for every good work.
2 timothy 4
4  I solemnly charge you before God and Christ Jesus, who is destined to judge the living and the dead, and by his manifestation and his kingdom,
2  preach the word, be at it urgently in favorable season, in troublesome season, reprove, reprimand, exhort, with all long-suffering and [art of] teaching.
3  For there will be a period of time when they will not put up with the healthful teaching, but, in accord with their own desires, they will accumulate teachers for themselves to have their ears tickled; 
4  and they will turn their ears away from the truth, whereas they will be turned aside to false stories.
5  You, though, keep your senses in all things, suffer evil, do [the] work of an evangelizer, fully accomplish your ministry.
6  For I am already being poured out like a drink offering, and the due time for my releasing is imminent.
7  I have fought the fine fight, I have run the course to the finish, I have observed the faith.
8  From this time on there is reserved for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will give me as a reward in that day, yet not only to me, but also to all those who have loved his manifestation.
9  Do your utmost to come to me shortly.
10  For Demas has forsaken me because he loved the present system of things, and he has gone to Thessalonica;  Crescens to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia.
11  Luke alone is with me. Take Mark and bring him with you, for he is useful to me for ministering.
12  But I have sent Tychicus off to Ephesus.
13  When you come, bring the cloak I left at Troas with Carpus, and the scrolls, especially the parchments.
14  Alexander the coppersmith did me many injuries—Jehovah will repay him according to his deeds—
15  and you too be on guard against him, for he resisted our words to an excessive degree.
16  In my first defense no one came to my side, but they all proceeded to forsake me—may it not be put to their account—
17  but the Lord stood near me and infused power into me, that through me the preaching might be fully accomplished and all the nations might hear it;  and I was delivered from the lion’s mouth.
18  The Lord will deliver me from every wicked work and will save [me] for his heavenly kingdom. To him be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
19  Give my greetings to Prisca and Aquila and the household of Onesiphorus.
20  Erastus stayed in Corinth, but I left Trophimus sick at Miletus.
21  Do your utmost to arrive before winter. Eubulus sends you his greetings, and [so do] Pudens and Linus and Claudia and all the brothers.
22  The Lord [be] with the spirit you [show]. His undeserved kindness [be] with YOU people.
titus 1
1  Paul, a slave of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ according to the faith of God’s chosen ones and the accurate knowledge of the truth which accords with godly devotion
2  upon the basis of a hope of the everlasting life which God, who cannot lie, promised before times long lasting,
3  whereas in his own due times he made his word manifest in the preaching with which I was entrusted, under command of our Savior, God; 
4  to Titus, a genuine child according to a faith shared in common: May there be undeserved kindness and peace from God [the] Father and Christ Jesus our Savior.
5  For this reason I left you in Crete, that you might correct the things that were defective and might make appointments of older men in city after city, as I gave you orders; 
6  if there is any man free from accusation, a husband of one wife, having believing children that were not under a charge of debauchery nor unruly.
7  For an overseer must be free from accusation as God’s steward, not self-willed, not prone to wrath, not a drunken brawler, not a smiter, not greedy of dishonest gain,
8  but hospitable, a lover of goodness, sound in mind, righteous, loyal, self-controlled,
9  holding firmly to the faithful word as respects his [art of] teaching, that he may be able both to exhort by the teaching that is healthful and to reprove those who contradict.
10  For there are many unruly men, profitless talkers, and deceivers of the mind, especially those men who adhere to the circumcision.
11  It is necessary to shut the mouths of these, as these very men keep on subverting entire households by teaching things they ought not for the sake of dishonest gain.
12  A certain one of them, their own prophet, said: “Cretans are always liars, injurious wild beasts, unemployed gluttons.”
13  This witness is true. For this very cause keep on reproving them with severity, that they may be healthy in the faith,
14  paying no attention to Jewish fables and commandments of men who turn themselves away from the truth.
15  All things are clean to clean [persons]. But to [persons] defiled and faithless nothing is clean, but both their minds and their consciences are defiled.
16  They publicly declare they know God, but they disown him by their works, because they are detestable and disobedient and not approved for good work of any sort.
titus 2
2  You, however, keep on speaking what things are fitting for healthful teaching.
2  Let the aged men be moderate in habits, serious, sound in mind, healthy in faith, in love, in endurance.
3  Likewise let the aged women be reverent in behavior, not slanderous, neither enslaved to a lot of wine, teachers of what is good; 
4  that they may recall the young women to their senses to love their husbands, to love their children,
5  to be sound in mind, chaste, workers at home, good, subjecting themselves to their own husbands, so that the word of God may not be spoken of abusively.
6  Likewise keep on exhorting the younger men to be sound in mind,
7  in all things showing yourself an example of fine works;  showing uncorruptness in your teaching, seriousness,
8  wholesome speech which cannot be condemned;  so that the man on the opposing side may get ashamed, having nothing vile to say about us.
9  Let slaves be in subjection to their owners in all things, and please them well, not talking back,
10  not committing theft, but exhibiting good fidelity to the full, so that they may adorn the teaching of our Savior, God, in all things.
11  For the undeserved kindness of God which brings salvation to all sorts of men has been manifested,
12  instructing us to repudiate ungodliness and worldly desires and to live with soundness of mind and righteousness and godly devotion amid this present system of things,
13  while we wait for the happy hope and glorious manifestation of the great God and of [the] Savior of us, Christ Jesus,
14  who gave himself for us that he might deliver us from every sort of lawlessness and cleanse for himself a people peculiarly his own, zealous for fine works.
15  Keep on speaking these things and exhorting and reproving with full authority to command. Let no man ever despise you.
titus 3
3  Continue reminding them to be in subjection and be obedient to governments and authorities as rulers, to be ready for every good work,
2  to speak injuriously of no one, not to be belligerent, to be reasonable, exhibiting all mildness toward all men.
3  For even we were once senseless, disobedient, being misled, being slaves to various desires and pleasures, carrying on in badness and envy, abhorrent, hating one another.
4  However, when the kindness and the love for man on the part of our Savior, God, was manifested,
5  owing to no works in righteousness that we had performed, but according to his mercy he saved us through the bath that brought us to life and through the making of us new by holy spirit.
6  This [spirit] he poured out richly upon us through Jesus Christ our Savior,
7  that, after being declared righteous by virtue of the undeserved kindness of that one, we might become heirs according to a hope of everlasting life.
8  Faithful is the saying, and concerning these things I desire you to make firm assertions constantly, in order that those who have believed God may keep their minds on maintaining fine works. These things are fine and beneficial to men.
9  But shun foolish questionings and genealogies and strife and fights over the Law, for they are unprofitable and futile.
10  As for a man that promotes a sect, reject him after a first and a second admonition; 
11  knowing that such a man has been turned out of the way and is sinning, he being self-condemned.
12  When I send Artemas or Tychicus to you, do your utmost to come to me at Nicopolis, for there is where I have decided to winter.
13  Carefully supply Zenas, who is versed in the Law, and Apollos for their trip, that they may not lack anything.
14  But let our people also learn to maintain fine works so as to meet their pressing needs, that they may not be unfruitful.
15  All those with me send you their greetings. Give my greetings to those who have affection for us in the faith. May the undeserved kindness be with all of YOU people.
philemon 1
1  Paul, a prisoner for the sake of Christ Jesus, and Timothy, [our] brother, to Philemon, our beloved one and fellow worker,
2  and to Apphia, our sister, and to Archippus, our fellow soldier, and to the congregation that is in your house:
3  May YOU people have undeserved kindness and peace from God our Father and [the] Lord Jesus Christ.
4  I always thank my God when I make mention of you in my prayers,
5  as I keep hearing of your love and faith which you have toward the Lord Jesus and toward all the holy ones; 
6  in order that the sharing of your faith may go into action by your acknowledging of every good thing among us as related to Christ.
7  For I got much joy and comfort over your love, because the tender affections of the holy ones have been refreshed through you, brother.
8  For this very reason, though I have great freeness of speech in connection with Christ to order you to do what is proper,
9  I am exhorting you rather on the basis of love, seeing that I am such as I am, Paul an aged man, yes, now also a prisoner for the sake of Christ Jesus; 
10  I am exhorting you concerning my child, to whom I became a father while in my [prison] bonds, Onesimus,
11  formerly useless to you but now useful to you and to me.
12  This very one I am sending back to you, yes, him, that is, my own tender affections.
13  I would like to hold him back for myself that in place of you he might keep on ministering to me in the [prison] bonds I bear for the sake of the good news.
14  But without your consent I do not want to do anything, so that your good act may be, not as under compulsion, but of your own free will.
15  Perhaps really on this account he broke away for an hour, that you may have him back forever,
16  no longer as a slave but as more than a slave, as a brother beloved, especially so to me, yet how much more so to you both in fleshly relationship and in [the] Lord.
17  If, therefore, you consider me a sharer, receive him kindly the way you would me.
18  Moreover, if he did you any wrong or owes you anything, keep this charged to my account.
19  I Paul am writing with my own hand: I will pay it back—not to be telling you that, besides, you owe me even yourself.
20  Yes, brother, may I derive profit from you in connection with [the] Lord: refresh my tender affections in connection with Christ.
21  Trusting in your compliance, I am writing you, knowing you will even do more than the things I say.
22  But along with that, also get lodging ready for me, for I am hoping that through the prayers of YOU people I shall be set at liberty for YOU.
23  Sending you greetings is Epaphras my fellow captive in union with Christ,
24  [also] Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, Luke, my fellow workers.
25  The undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus Christ [be] with the spirit YOU people [show].
hebrews 1
1  God, who long ago spoke on many occasions and in many ways to our forefathers by means of the prophets,
2  has at the end of these days spoken to us by means of a Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, and through whom he made the systems of things.
3  He is the reflection of [his] glory and the exact representation of his very being, and he sustains all things by the word of his power;  and after he had made a purification for our sins he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty in lofty places.
4  So he has become better than the angels, to the extent that he has inherited a name more excellent than theirs.
5  For example, to which one of the angels did he ever say: “You are my son;  I, today, I have become your father”? And again: “I myself shall become his father, and he himself will become my son”?
6  But when he again brings his Firstborn into the inhabited earth, he says: “And let all God’s angels do obeisance to him.”
7  Also, with reference to the angels he says: “And he makes his angels spirits, and his public servants a flame of fire.”
8  But with reference to the Son: “God is your throne forever and ever, and [the] scepter of your kingdom is the scepter of uprightness.
9  You loved righteousness, and you hated lawlessness. That is why God, your God, anointed you with [the] oil of exultation more than your partners.”
10  And: “You at [the] beginning, O Lord, laid the foundations of the earth itself, and the heavens are [the] works of your hands.
11  They themselves will perish, but you yourself are to remain continually;  and just like an outer garment they will all grow old,
12  and you will wrap them up just as a cloak, as an outer garment;  and they will be changed, but you are the same, and your years will never run out.”
13  But with reference to which one of the angels has he ever said: “Sit at my right hand, until I place your enemies as a stool for your feet”?
14  Are they not all spirits for public service, sent forth to minister for those who are going to inherit salvation?
hebrews 2
2  That is why it is necessary for us to pay more than the usual attention to the things heard by us, that we may never drift away.
2  For if the word spoken through angels proved to be firm, and every transgression and disobedient act received a retribution in harmony with justice; 
3  how shall we escape if we have neglected a salvation of such greatness in that it began to be spoken through [our] Lord and was verified for us by those who heard him,
4  while God joined in bearing witness with signs as well as portents and various powerful works and with distributions of holy spirit according to his will?
5  For it is not to angels that he has subjected the inhabited earth to come, about which we are speaking.
6  But a certain witness has given proof somewhere, saying: “What is man that you keep him in mind, or [the] son of man that you take care of him?
7  You made him a little lower than angels;  with glory and honor you crowned him, and appointed him over the works of your hands.
8  All things you subjected under his feet.” For in that he subjected all things to him [God] left nothing that is not subject to him. Now, though, we do not yet see all things in subjection to him; 
9  but we behold Jesus, who has been made a little lower than angels, crowned with glory and honor for having suffered death, that he by God’s undeserved kindness might taste death for every [man].
10  For it was fitting for the one for whose sake all things are and through whom all things are, in bringing many sons to glory, to make the Chief Agent of their salvation perfect through sufferings.
11  For both he who is sanctifying and those who are being sanctified all [stem] from one, and for this cause he is not ashamed to call them “brothers,”
12  as he says: “I will declare your name to my brothers;  in the middle of [the] congregation I will praise you with song.”
13  And again: “I will have my trust in him.” And again: “Look! I and the young children, whom Jehovah gave me.”
14  Therefore, since the “young children” are sharers of blood and flesh, he also similarly partook of the same things, that through his death he might bring to nothing the one having the means to cause death, that is, the Devil; 
15  and [that] he might emancipate all those who for fear of death were subject to slavery all through their lives.
16  For he is really not assisting angels at all, but he is assisting Abraham’s seed.
17  Consequently he was obliged to become like his “brothers” in all respects, that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, in order to offer propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the people.
18  For in that he himself has suffered when being put to the test, he is able to come to the aid of those who are being put to the test.
hebrews 3
3  Consequently, holy brothers, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the apostle and high priest whom we confess—Jesus.
2  He was faithful to the One that made him such, as Moses was also in all the house of that One.
3  For the latter is counted worthy of more glory than Moses, inasmuch as he who constructs it has more honor than the house.
4  Of course, every house is constructed by someone, but he that constructed all things is God.
5  And Moses as an attendant was faithful in all the house of that One as a testimony of the things that were to be spoken afterwards,
6  but Christ [was faithful] as a Son over the house of that One. We are the house of that One, if we make fast our hold on our freeness of speech and our boasting over the hope firm to the end.
7  For this reason, just as the holy spirit says: “Today if YOU people listen to his own voice,
8  do not harden YOUR hearts as on the occasion of causing bitter anger, as in the day of making the test in the wilderness,
9  in which YOUR forefathers made a test of me with a trial, and yet they had seen my works for forty years.
10  For this reason I became disgusted with this generation and said, ‘They always go astray in their hearts, and they themselves have not come to know my ways.’
11  So I swore in my anger, ‘They shall not enter into my rest.’”
12  Beware, brothers, for fear there should ever develop in any one of YOU a wicked heart lacking faith by drawing away from the living God; 
13  but keep on exhorting one another each day, as long as it may be called “Today,” for fear any one of YOU should become hardened by the deceptive power of sin.
14  For we actually become partakers of the Christ only if we make fast our hold on the confidence we had at the beginning firm to the end,
15  while it is being said: “Today if YOU people listen to his own voice, do not harden YOUR hearts as on the occasion of causing bitter anger.”
16  For who were they that heard and yet provoked to bitter anger? Did not, in fact, all do so who went out of Egypt under Moses?
17  Moreover, with whom did [God] become disgusted for forty years? Was it not with those who sinned, whose carcasses fell in the wilderness?
18  But to whom did he swear that they should not enter into his rest except to those who acted disobediently?
19  So we see that they could not enter in because of lack of faith.
hebrews 4
4  Therefore, since a promise is left of entering into his rest, let us fear that sometime someone of YOU may seem to have fallen short of it.
2  For we have had the good news declared to us also, even as they also had;  but the word which was heard did not benefit them, because they were not united by faith with those who did hear.
3  For we who have exercised faith do enter into the rest, just as he has said: “So I swore in my anger, ‘They shall not enter into my rest,’” although his works were finished from the founding of the world.
4  For in one place he has said of the seventh day as follows: “And God rested on the seventh day from all his works,”
5  and again in this place: “They shall not enter into my rest.”
6  Since, therefore, it remains for some to enter into it, and those to whom the good news was first declared did not enter in because of disobedience,
7  he again marks off a certain day by saying after so long a time in David’s [psalm] “Today”;  just as it has been said above: “Today if YOU people listen to his own voice, do not harden YOUR hearts.”
8  For if Joshua had led them into a place of rest, [God] would not afterward have spoken of another day.
9  So there remains a sabbath resting for the people of God.
10  For the man that has entered into [God’s] rest has also himself rested from his own works, just as God did from his own.
11  Let us therefore do our utmost to enter into that rest, for fear anyone should fall in the same pattern of disobedience.
12  For the word of God is alive and exerts power and is sharper than any two-edged sword and pierces even to the dividing of soul and spirit, and of joints and [their] marrow, and [is] able to discern thoughts and intentions of [the] heart.
13  And there is not a creation that is not manifest to his sight, but all things are naked and openly exposed to the eyes of him with whom we have an accounting.
14  Seeing, therefore, that we have a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold onto [our] confessing of [him].
15  For we have as high priest, not one who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses, but one who has been tested in all respects like ourselves, but without sin.
16  Let us, therefore, approach with freeness of speech to the throne of undeserved kindness, that we may obtain mercy and find undeserved kindness for help at the right time.
hebrews 5
5  For every high priest taken from among men is appointed in behalf of men over the things pertaining to God, that he may offer gifts and sacrifices for sins.
2  He is able to deal moderately with the ignorant and erring ones since he also is surrounded with his own weakness,
3  and on its account he is obliged to make offerings for sins as much for himself as for the people.
4  Also, a man takes this honor, not of his own accord, but only when he is called by God, just as Aaron also [was].
5  So too the Christ did not glorify himself by becoming a high priest, but [was glorified by him] who spoke with reference to him: “You are my son;  I, today, I have become your father.”
6  Just as he says also in another place: “You are a priest forever according to the manner of Melchizedek.”
7  In the days of his flesh [Christ] offered up supplications and also petitions to the One who was able to save him out of death, with strong outcries and tears, and he was favorably heard for his godly fear.
8  Although he was a Son, he learned obedience from the things he suffered; 
9  and after he had been made perfect he became responsible for everlasting salvation to all those obeying him,
10  because he has been specifically called by God a high priest according to the manner of Melchizedek.
11  Concerning him we have much to say and hard to be explained, since YOU have become dull in YOUR hearing.
12  For, indeed, although YOU ought to be teachers in view of the time, YOU again need someone to teach YOU from the beginning the elementary things of the sacred pronouncements of God;  and YOU have become such as need milk, not solid food.
13  For everyone that partakes of milk is unacquainted with the word of righteousness, for he is a babe.
14  But solid food belongs to mature people, to those who through use have their perceptive powers trained to distinguish both right and wrong.
hebrews 6
6  For this reason, now that we have left the primary doctrine about the Christ, let us press on to maturity, not laying a foundation again, namely, repentance from dead works, and faith toward God,
2  the teaching on baptisms and the laying on of the hands, the resurrection of the dead and everlasting judgment.
3  And this we will do, if God indeed permits.
4  For it is impossible as regards those who have once for all been enlightened, and who have tasted the heavenly free gift, and who have become partakers of holy spirit,
5  and who have tasted the fine word of God and powers of the coming system of things,
6  but who have fallen away, to revive them again to repentance, because they impale the Son of God afresh for themselves and expose him to public shame.
7  For example, the ground that drinks in the rain which often comes upon it, and that then brings forth vegetation suitable to those for whom it is also cultivated, receives in return a blessing from God.
8  But if it produces thorns and thistles, it is rejected and is near to being cursed;  and it ends up with being burned.
9  However, in YOUR case, beloved ones, we are convinced of better things and things accompanied with salvation, although we are speaking in this way.
10  For God is not unrighteous so as to forget YOUR work and the love YOU showed for his name, in that YOU have ministered to the holy ones and continue ministering.
11  But we desire each one of YOU to show the same industriousness so as to have the full assurance of the hope down to the end,
12  in order that YOU may not become sluggish, but be imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.
13  For when God made his promise to Abraham, since he could not swear by anyone greater, he swore by himself,
14  saying: “Assuredly in blessing I will bless you, and in multiplying I will multiply you.”
15  And thus after [Abraham] had shown patience, he obtained [this] promise.
16  For men swear by the one greater, and their oath is the end of every dispute, as it is a legal guarantee to them.
17  In this manner God, when he purposed to demonstrate more abundantly to the heirs of the promise the unchangeableness of his counsel, stepped in with an oath,
18  in order that, through two unchangeable things in which it is impossible for God to lie, we who have fled to the refuge may have strong encouragement to lay hold on the hope set before us.
19  This [hope] we have as an anchor for the soul, both sure and firm, and it enters in within the curtain,
20  where a forerunner has entered in our behalf, Jesus, who has become a high priest according to the manner of Melchizedek forever.
hebrews 7
7  For this Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of the Most High God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and blessed him
2  and to whom Abraham apportioned a tenth from all things, is first of all, by translation, “King of Righteousness,” and is then also king of Salem, that is, “King of Peace.”
3  In being fatherless, motherless, without genealogy, having neither a beginning of days nor an end of life, but having been made like the Son of God, he remains a priest perpetually.
4  BEHOLD, then, how great this man was to whom Abraham, the family head, gave a tenth out of the chief spoils.
5  True, the men from the sons of Levi who receive their priestly office have a commandment to collect tithes from the people according to the Law, that is, from their brothers, even if these have issued from the loins of Abraham; 
6  but the man who did not trace his genealogy from them took tithes from Abraham and blessed him who had the promises.
7  Now without any dispute, the less is blessed by the greater.
8  And in the one case it is men who are dying that receive tithes, but in the other case it is someone of whom it is witnessed that he lives.
9  And, if I may use the expression, through Abraham even Levi who receives tithes has paid tithes,
10  for he was still in the loins of his forefather when Melchizedek met him.
11  If, then, perfection were really through the Levitical priesthood, (for with it as a feature the people were given the Law,) what further need would there be for another priest to arise according to the manner of Melchizedek and not said to be according to the manner of Aaron?
12  For since the priesthood is being changed, there comes to be of necessity a change also of the law.
13  For the man respecting whom these things are said has been a member of another tribe, from which no one has officiated at the altar.
14  For it is quite plain that our Lord has sprung up out of Judah, a tribe about which Moses spoke nothing concerning priests.
15  And it is still more abundantly clear that with a similarity to Melchizedek there arises another priest,
16  who has become such, not according to the law of a commandment depending upon the flesh, but according to the power of an indestructible life,
17  for in witness it is said: “You are a priest forever according to the manner of Melchizedek.”
18  Certainly, then, there occurs a setting aside of the preceding commandment on account of its weakness and ineffectiveness.
19  For the Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in besides of a better hope did, through which we are drawing near to God.
20  Also, to the extent that it was not without a sworn oath,
21  (for there are indeed men that have become priests without a sworn oath, but there is one with an oath sworn by the One who said respecting him: “Jehovah has sworn (and he will feel no regret), ‘You are a priest forever,’”)
22  to that extent also Jesus has become the one given in pledge of a better covenant.
23  Furthermore, many had to become priests [in succession] because of being prevented by death from continuing as such,
24  but he because of continuing alive forever has his priesthood without any successors.
25  Consequently he is able also to save completely those who are approaching God through him, because he is always alive to plead for them.
26  For such a high priest as this was suitable for us, loyal, guileless, undefiled, separated from the sinners, and become higher than the heavens.
27  He does not need daily, as those high priests do, to offer up sacrifices, first for his own sins and then for those of the people: (for this he did once for all time when he offered himself up; )
28  for the Law appoints men high priests having weakness, but the word of the sworn oath that came after the Law appoints a Son, who is perfected forever.
hebrews 8
8  Now as to the things being discussed this is the main point: We have such a high priest as this, and he has sat down at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens,
2  a public servant of the holy place and of the true tent, which Jehovah put up, and not man.
3  For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices;  wherefore it was necessary for this one also to have something to offer.
4  If, now, he were upon earth, he would not be a priest, there being [men] who offer the gifts according to the Law,
5  but which [men] are rendering sacred service in a typical representation and a shadow of the heavenly things;  just as Moses, when about to make the tent in completion, was given the divine command: For says he: “See that you make all things after [their] pattern that was shown to you in the mountain.”
6  But now [Jesus] has obtained a more excellent public service, so that he is also the mediator of a correspondingly better covenant, which has been legally established upon better promises.
7  For if that first covenant had been faultless, no place would have been sought for a second; 
8  for he does find fault with the people when he says: “‘Look! There are days coming,’ says Jehovah, ‘and I will conclude with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah a new covenant; 
9  not according to the covenant that I made with their forefathers in [the] day of my taking hold of their hand to bring them forth out of the land of Egypt, because they did not continue in my covenant, so that I stopped caring for them,’ says Jehovah.”
10  “‘For this is the covenant that I shall covenant with the house of Israel after those days,’ says Jehovah. ‘I will put my laws in their mind, and in their hearts I shall write them. And I will become their God, and they themselves will become my people.
11  “‘And they will by no means teach each one his fellow citizen and each one his brother, saying: “Know Jehovah!” For they will all know me, from [the] least one to [the] greatest one of them.
12  For I shall be merciful to their unrighteous deeds, and I shall by no means call their sins to mind anymore.’”
13  In his saying “a new [covenant]” he has made the former one obsolete. Now that which is made obsolete and growing old is near to vanishing away.
hebrews 9
9  For its part, then, the former [covenant] used to have ordinances of sacred service and [its] mundane holy place.
2  For there was constructed a first tent [compartment] in which were the lampstand and also the table and the display of the loaves;  and it is called “the Holy Place.”
3  But behind the second curtain was the tent [compartment] called “the Most Holy.”
4  This had a golden censer and the ark of the covenant overlaid all around with gold, in which were the golden jar having the manna and the rod of Aaron that budded and the tablets of the covenant; 
5  but up above it were the glorious cherubs overshadowing the propitiatory [cover]. But now is not the time to speak in detail concerning these things.
6  After these things had been constructed this way, the priests enter the first tent [compartment] at all times to perform the sacred services; 
7  but into the second [compartment] the high priest alone enters once a year, not without blood, which he offers for himself and for the sins of ignorance of the people.
8  Thus the holy spirit makes it plain that the way into the holy place had not yet been made manifest while the first tent was standing.
9  This very [tent] is an illustration for the appointed time that is now here, and in keeping with it both gifts and sacrifices are offered. However, these are not able to make the [man] doing sacred service perfect as respects his conscience,
10  but have to do only with foods and drinks and various baptisms. They were legal requirements pertaining to the flesh and were imposed until the appointed time to set things straight.
11  However, when Christ came as a high priest of the good things that have come to pass, through the greater and more perfect tent not made with hands, that is, not of this creation,
12  he entered, no, not with the blood of goats and of young bulls, but with his own blood, once for all time into the holy place and obtained an everlasting deliverance [for us].
13  For if the blood of goats and of bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkled on those who have been defiled sanctifies to the extent of cleanness of the flesh,
14  how much more will the blood of the Christ, who through an everlasting spirit offered himself without blemish to God, cleanse our consciences from dead works that we may render sacred service to [the] living God?
15  So that is why he is a mediator of a new covenant, in order that, because a death has occurred for [their] release by ransom from the transgressions under the former covenant, the ones who have been called might receive the promise of the everlasting inheritance.
16  For where there is a covenant, the death of the [human] covenanter needs to be furnished.
17  For a covenant is valid over dead [victims], since it is not in force at any time while the [human] covenanter is living.
18  Consequently neither was the former [covenant] inaugurated without blood.
19  For when every commandment according to the Law had been spoken by Moses to all the people, he took the blood of the young bulls and of the goats with water and scarlet wool and hyssop and sprinkled the book itself and all the people,
20  saying: “This is the blood of the covenant that God has laid as a charge upon YOU.”
21  And he sprinkled the tent and all the vessels of the public service likewise with the blood.
22  Yes, nearly all things are cleansed with blood according to the Law, and unless blood is poured out no forgiveness takes place.
23  Therefore it was necessary that the typical representations of the things in the heavens should be cleansed by these means, but the heavenly things themselves with sacrifices that are better than such sacrifices.
24  For Christ entered, not into a holy place made with hands, which is a copy of the reality, but into heaven itself, now to appear before the person of God for us.
25  Neither is it in order that he should offer himself often, as indeed the high priest enters into the holy place from year to year with blood not his own.
26  Otherwise, he would have to suffer often from the founding of the world. But now he has manifested himself once for all time at the conclusion of the systems of things to put sin away through the sacrifice of himself.
27  And as it is reserved for men to die once for all time, but after this a judgment,
28  so also the Christ was offered once for all time to bear the sins of many;  and the second time that he appears it will be apart from sin and to those earnestly looking for him for [their] salvation.
hebrews 10
10  For since the Law has a shadow of the good things to come, but not the very substance of the things, [men] can never with the same sacrifices from year to year which they offer continually make those who approach perfect.
2  Otherwise, would the [sacrifices] not have stopped being offered, because those rendering sacred service who had been cleansed once for all time would have no consciousness of sins anymore?
3  To the contrary, by these sacrifices there is a reminding of sins from year to year,
4  for it is not possible for the blood of bulls and of goats to take sins away.
5  Hence when he comes into the world he says: “‘Sacrifice and offering you did not want, but you prepared a body for me.
6  You did not approve of whole burnt offerings and sin [offering].’
7  Then I said, ‘Look! I am come (in the roll of the book it is written about me) to do your will, O God.’”
8  After first saying: “You did not want nor did you approve of sacrifices and offerings and whole burnt offerings and sin [offering]”—[sacrifices] that are offered according to the Law—
9  then he actually says: “Look! I am come to do your will.” He does away with what is first that he may establish what is second.
10  By the said “will” we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all time.
11  Also, every priest takes his station from day to day to render public service and to offer the same sacrifices often, as these are at no time able to take sins away completely.
12  But this [man] offered one sacrifice for sins perpetually and sat down at the right hand of God,
13  from then on awaiting until his enemies should be placed as a stool for his feet.
14  For it is by one [sacrificial] offering that he has made those who are being sanctified perfect perpetually.
15  Moreover, the holy spirit also bears witness to us, for after it has said:
16  “‘This is the covenant that I shall covenant toward them after those days,’ says Jehovah. ‘I will put my laws in their hearts, and in their minds I shall write them,’”
17  [it says afterwards:] “And I shall by no means call their sins and their lawless deeds to mind anymore.”
18  Now where there is forgiveness of these, there is no longer an offering for sin.
19  Therefore, brothers, since we have boldness for the way of entry into the holy place by the blood of Jesus,
20  which he inaugurated for us as a new and living way through the curtain, that is, his flesh,
21  and since we have a great priest over the house of God,
22  let us approach with true hearts in the full assurance of faith, having had our hearts sprinkled from a wicked conscience and our bodies bathed with clean water.
23  Let us hold fast the public declaration of our hope without wavering, for he is faithful that promised.
24  And let us consider one another to incite to love and fine works,
25  not forsaking the gathering of ourselves together, as some have the custom, but encouraging one another, and all the more so as YOU behold the day drawing near.
26  For if we practice sin willfully after having received the accurate knowledge of the truth, there is no longer any sacrifice for sins left,
27  but [there is] a certain fearful expectation of judgment and [there is] a fiery jealousy that is going to consume those in opposition.
28  Any man that has disregarded the law of Moses dies without compassion, upon the testimony of two or three.
29  Of how much more severe a punishment, do YOU think, will the man be counted worthy who has trampled upon the Son of God and who has esteemed as of ordinary value the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified, and who has outraged the spirit of undeserved kindness with contempt?
30  For we know him that said: “Vengeance is mine;  I will recompense”;  and again: “Jehovah will judge his people.”
31  It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of [the] living God.
32  However, keep on remembering the former days in which, after YOU were enlightened, YOU endured a great contest under sufferings,
33  sometimes while YOU were being exposed as in a theater both to reproaches and tribulations, and sometimes while YOU became sharers with those who were having such an experience.
34  For YOU both expressed sympathy for those in prison and joyfully took the plundering of YOUR belongings, knowing YOU yourselves have a better and an abiding possession.
35  Do not, therefore, throw away YOUR freeness of speech, which has a great reward to be paid it.
36  For YOU have need of endurance, in order that, after YOU have done the will of God, YOU may receive the [fulfillment of the] promise.
37  For yet “a very little while,” and “he who is coming will arrive and will not delay.”
38  “But my righteous one will live by reason of faith,” and, “if he shrinks back, my soul has no pleasure in him.”
39  Now we are not the sort that shrink back to destruction, but the sort that have faith to the preserving alive of the soul.
hebrews 11
11  Faith is the assured expectation of things hoped for, the evident demonstration of realities though not beheld.
2  For by means of this the men of old times had witness borne to them.
3  By faith we perceive that the systems of things were put in order by God’s word, so that what is beheld has come to be out of things that do not appear.
4  By faith Abel offered God a sacrifice of greater worth than Cain, through which [faith] he had witness borne to him that he was righteous, God bearing witness respecting his gifts;  and through it he, although he died, yet speaks.
5  By faith Enoch was transferred so as not to see death, and he was nowhere to be found because God had transferred him;  for before his transference he had the witness that he had pleased God well.
6  Moreover, without faith it is impossible to please [him] well, for he that approaches God must believe that he is and that he becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him.
7  By faith Noah, after being given divine warning of things not yet beheld, showed godly fear and constructed an ark for the saving of his household;  and through this [faith] he condemned the world, and he became an heir of the righteousness that is according to faith.
8  By faith Abraham, when he was called, obeyed in going out into a place he was destined to receive as an inheritance;  and he went out, although not knowing where he was going.
9  By faith he resided as an alien in the land of the promise as in a foreign land, and dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the very same promise.
10  For he was awaiting the city having real foundations, the builder and maker of which [city] is God.
11  By faith also Sarah herself received power to conceive seed, even when she was past the age limit, since she esteemed him faithful who had promised.
12  Hence also from one [man], and him as good as dead, there were born [children] just as the stars of heaven for multitude and as the sands that are by the seaside, innumerable.
13  In faith all these died, although they did not get the [fulfillment of the] promises, but they saw them afar off and welcomed them and publicly declared that they were strangers and temporary residents in the land.
14  For those who say such things give evidence that they are earnestly seeking a place of their own.
15  And yet, if they had indeed kept remembering that [place] from which they had gone forth, they would have had opportunity to return.
16  But now they are reaching out for a better [place], that is, one belonging to heaven. Hence God is not ashamed of them, to be called upon as their God, for he has made a city ready for them.
17  By faith Abraham, when he was tested, as good as offered up Isaac, and the man that had gladly received the promises attempted to offer up [his] only-begotten [son],
18  although it had been said to him: “What will be called ‘your seed’ will be through Isaac.”
19  But he reckoned that God was able to raise him up even from the dead;  and from there he did receive him also in an illustrative way.
20  By faith also Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come.
21  By faith Jacob, when about to die, blessed each of the sons of Joseph and worshiped leaning upon the top of his staff.
22  By faith Joseph, nearing his end, made mention of the exodus of the sons of Israel;  and he gave a command concerning his bones.
23  By faith Moses was hid for three months by his parents after his birth, because they saw the young child was beautiful and they did not fear the order of the king.
24  By faith Moses, when grown up, refused to be called the son of the daughter of Pharaoh,
25  choosing to be ill-treated with the people of God rather than to have the temporary enjoyment of sin,
26  because he esteemed the reproach of the Christ as riches greater than the treasures of Egypt;  for he looked intently toward the payment of the reward.
27  By faith he left Egypt, but not fearing the anger of the king, for he continued steadfast as seeing the One who is invisible.
28  By faith he had celebrated the passover and the splashing of the blood, that the destroyer might not touch their firstborn ones.
29  By faith they passed through the Red Sea as on dry land, but on venturing out upon it the Egyptians were swallowed up.
30  By faith the walls of Jericho fell down after they had been encircled for seven days.
31  By faith Rahab the harlot did not perish with those who acted disobediently, because she received the spies in a peaceable way.
32  And what more shall I say? For the time will fail me if I go on to relate about Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, David as well as Samuel and the [other] prophets,
33  who through faith defeated kingdoms in conflict, effected righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions,
34  stayed the force of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, from a weak state were made powerful, became valiant in war, routed the armies of foreigners.
35  Women received their dead by resurrection;  but other [men] were tortured because they would not accept release by some ransom, in order that they might attain a better resurrection.
36  Yes, others received their trial by mockings and scourgings, indeed, more than that, by bonds and prisons.
37  They were stoned, they were tried, they were sawn asunder, they died by slaughter with the sword, they went about in sheepskins, in goatskins, while they were in want, in tribulation, under ill-treatment; 
38  and the world was not worthy of them. They wandered about in deserts and mountains and caves and dens of the earth.
39  And yet all these, although they had witness borne to them through their faith, did not get the [fulfillment of the] promise,
40  as God foresaw something better for us, in order that they might not be made perfect apart from us.
hebrews 12
12  So, then, because we have so great a cloud of witnesses surrounding us, let us also put off every weight and the sin that easily entangles us, and let us run with endurance the race that is set before us,
2  as we look intently at the Chief Agent and Perfecter of our faith, Jesus. For the joy that was set before him he endured a torture stake, despising shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.
3  Indeed, consider closely the one who has endured such contrary talk by sinners against their own interests, that YOU may not get tired and give out in YOUR souls.
4  In carrying on YOUR contest against that sin YOU have never yet resisted as far as blood,
5  but YOU have entirely forgotten the exhortation which addresses YOU as sons: “My son, do not belittle [the] discipline from Jehovah, neither give out when you are corrected by him; 
6  for whom Jehovah loves he disciplines;  in fact, he scourges every one whom he receives as a son.”
7  It is for discipline YOU are enduring. God is dealing with YOU as with sons. For what son is he that a father does not discipline?
8  But if YOU are without the discipline of which all have become partakers, YOU are really illegitimate children, and not sons.
9  Furthermore, we used to have fathers who were of our flesh to discipline us, and we used to give them respect. Shall we not much more subject ourselves to the Father of our spiritual life and live?
10  For they for a few days used to discipline us according to what seemed good to them, but he does so for our profit that we may partake of his holiness.
11  True, no discipline seems for the present to be joyous, but grievous;  yet afterward to those who have been trained by it it yields peaceable fruit, namely, righteousness.
12  Hence straighten up the hands that hang down and the enfeebled knees,
13  and keep making straight paths for YOUR feet, that what is lame may not be put out of joint, but rather that it may be healed.
14  Pursue peace with all people, and the sanctification without which no man will see the Lord,
15  carefully watching that no one may be deprived of the undeserved kindness of God;  that no poisonous root may spring up and cause trouble and that many may not be defiled by it; 
16  that there may be no fornicator nor anyone not appreciating sacred things, like Esau, who in exchange for one meal gave away his rights as firstborn.
17  For YOU know that afterward also when he wanted to inherit the blessing he was rejected, for, although he earnestly sought a change of mind with tears, he found no place for it.
18  For YOU have not approached that which can be felt and which has been set aflame with fire, and a dark cloud and thick darkness and a tempest,
19  and the blare of a trumpet and the voice of words;  on hearing which voice the people implored that no word should be added to them.
20  For the command was not bearable to them: “And if a beast touches the mountain, it must be stoned.”
21  Also, the display was so fearsome that Moses said: “I am fearful and trembling.”
22  But YOU have approached a Mount Zion and a city of [the] living God, heavenly Jerusalem, and myriads of angels,
23  in general assembly, and the congregation of the firstborn who have been enrolled in the heavens, and God the Judge of all, and the spiritual lives of righteous ones who have been made perfect,
24  and Jesus the mediator of a new covenant, and the blood of sprinkling, which speaks in a better way than Abel’s [blood].
25  See that YOU do not beg off from him who is speaking. For if they did not escape who begged off from him who was giving divine warning upon earth, much more shall we not if we turn away from him who speaks from the heavens.
26  At that time his voice shook the earth, but now he has promised, saying: “Yet once more I will set in commotion not only the earth but also the heaven.”
27  Now the expression “Yet once more” signifies the removal of the things being shaken as things that have been made, in order that the things not being shaken may remain.
28  Wherefore, seeing that we are to receive a kingdom that cannot be shaken, let us continue to have undeserved kindness, through which we may acceptably render God sacred service with godly fear and awe.
29  For our God is also a consuming fire.
hebrews 13
13  Let YOUR brotherly love continue.
2  Do not forget hospitality, for through it some, unknown to themselves, entertained angels.
3  Keep in mind those in prison bonds as though YOU have been bound with them, and those being ill-treated, since YOU yourselves also are still in a body.
4  Let marriage be honorable among all, and the marriage bed be without defilement, for God will judge fornicators and adulterers.
5  Let [YOUR] manner of life be free of the love of money, while YOU are content with the present things. For he has said: “I will by no means leave you nor by any means forsake you.”
6  So that we may be of good courage and say: “Jehovah is my helper;  I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?”
7  Remember those who are taking the lead among YOU, who have spoken the word of God to YOU, and as YOU contemplate how [their] conduct turns out imitate [their] faith.
8  Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today, and forever.
9  Do not be carried away with various and strange teachings;  for it is fine for the heart to be given firmness by undeserved kindness, not by eatables, by which those who occupy themselves with them have not been benefited.
10  We have an altar from which those who do sacred service at the tent have no authority to eat.
11  For the bodies of those animals whose blood is taken into the holy place by the high priest for sin are burned up outside the camp.
12  Hence Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered outside the gate.
13  Let us, then, go forth to him outside the camp, bearing the reproach he bore,
14  for we do not have here a city that continues, but we are earnestly seeking the one to come.
15  Through him let us always offer to God a sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of lips which make public declaration to his name.
16  Moreover, do not forget the doing of good and the sharing of things with others, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.
17  Be obedient to those who are taking the lead among YOU and be submissive, for they are keeping watch over YOUR souls as those who will render an account;  that they may do this with joy and not with sighing, for this would be damaging to YOU.
18  Carry on prayer for us, for we trust we have an honest conscience, as we wish to conduct ourselves honestly in all things.
19  But I exhort YOU more especially to do this, that I may be restored to YOU the sooner.
20  Now may the God of peace, who brought up from the dead the great shepherd of the sheep with the blood of an everlasting covenant, our Lord Jesus,
21  equip YOU with every good thing to do his will, performing in us through Jesus Christ that which is well-pleasing in his sight;  to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
22  Now I exhort YOU, brothers, to bear with this word of encouragement, for I have, indeed, composed a letter to YOU in few words.
23  Take note that our brother Timothy has been released, with whom, if he comes quite soon, I shall see YOU.
24  Give my greetings to all those who are taking the lead among YOU and to all the holy ones. Those in Italy send YOU their greetings.
25  The undeserved kindness be with all of YOU.
james 1
1  James, a slave of God and of [the] Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes that are scattered about: Greetings!
2  Consider it all joy, my brothers, when YOU meet with various trials,
3  knowing as YOU do that this tested quality of YOUR faith works out endurance.
4  But let endurance have its work complete, that YOU may be complete and sound in all respects, not lacking in anything.
5  So, if any one of YOU is lacking in wisdom, let him keep on asking God, for he gives generously to all and without reproaching;  and it will be given him.
6  But let him keep on asking in faith, not doubting at all, for he who doubts is like a wave of the sea driven by the wind and blown about.
7  In fact, let not that man suppose that he will receive anything from Jehovah; 
8  he is an indecisive man, unsteady in all his ways.
9  But let the lowly brother exult over his exaltation,
10  and the rich one over his humiliation, because like a flower of the vegetation he will pass away.
11  For the sun rises with its burning heat and withers the vegetation, and its flower drops off and the beauty of its outward appearance perishes. So, too, the rich man will fade away in his ways of life.
12  Happy is the man that keeps on enduring trial, because on becoming approved he will receive the crown of life, which Jehovah promised to those who continue loving him.
13  When under trial, let no one say: “I am being tried by God.” For with evil things God cannot be tried nor does he himself try anyone.
14  But each one is tried by being drawn out and enticed by his own desire.
15  Then the desire, when it has become fertile, gives birth to sin;  in turn, sin, when it has been accomplished, brings forth death.
16  Do not be misled, my beloved brothers.
17  Every good gift and every perfect present is from above, for it comes down from the Father of the [celestial] lights, and with him there is not a variation of the turning of the shadow.
18  Because he willed it, he brought us forth by the word of truth, for us to be certain firstfruits of his creatures.
19  Know this, my beloved brothers. Every man must be swift about hearing, slow about speaking, slow about wrath; 
20  for man’s wrath does not work out God’s righteousness.
21  Hence put away all filthiness and that superfluous thing, badness, and accept with mildness the implanting of the word which is able to save YOUR souls.
22  However, become doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves with false reasoning.
23  For if anyone is a hearer of the word, and not a doer, this one is like a man looking at his natural face in a mirror.
24  For he looks at himself, and off he goes and immediately forgets what sort of man he is.
25  But he who peers into the perfect law that belongs to freedom and who persists in [it], this [man], because he has become, not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, will be happy in his doing [it].
26  If any man seems to himself to be a formal worshiper and yet does not bridle his tongue, but goes on deceiving his own heart, this man’s form of worship is futile.
27  The form of worship that is clean and undefiled from the standpoint of our God and Father is this: to look after orphans and widows in their tribulation, and to keep oneself without spot from the world.
james 2
2  My brothers, YOU are not holding the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, our glory, with acts of favoritism, are YOU?
2  For, if a man with gold rings on his fingers and in splendid clothing enters into a gathering of YOU, but a poor [man] in filthy clothing also enters,
3  yet YOU look with favor upon the one wearing the splendid clothing and say: “You take this seat here in a fine place,” and YOU say to the poor one: “You keep standing,” or: “Take that seat there under my footstool,”
4  YOU have class distinctions among yourselves and YOU have become judges rendering wicked decisions, is that not so?
5  Listen, my beloved brothers. God chose the ones who are poor respecting the world to be rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom, which he promised to those who love him, did he not?
6  YOU, though, have dishonored the poor [man]. The rich oppress YOU, and they drag YOU before law courts, do they not?
7  They blaspheme the fine name by which YOU were called, do they not?
8  If, now, YOU practice carrying out the kingly law according to the scripture: “You must love your neighbor as yourself,” YOU are doing quite well.
9  But if YOU continue showing favoritism, YOU are working a sin, for YOU are reproved by the law as transgressors.
10  For whoever observes all the Law but makes a false step in one point, he has become an offender against them all.
11  For he who said: “You must not commit adultery,” said also: “You must not murder.” If, now, you do not commit adultery but you do murder, you have become a transgressor of law.
12  Keep on speaking in such a way and keep on doing in such a way as those do who are going to be judged by the law of a free people.
13  For the one that does not practice mercy will have [his] judgment without mercy. Mercy exults triumphantly over judgment.
14  Of what benefit is it, my brothers, if a certain one says he has faith but he does not have works? That faith cannot save him, can it?
15  If a brother or a sister is in a naked state and lacking the food sufficient for the day,
16  yet a certain one of YOU says to them: “Go in peace, keep warm and well fed,” but YOU do not give them the necessities for [their] body, of what benefit is it?
17  Thus, too, faith, if it does not have works, is dead in itself.
18  Nevertheless, a certain one will say: “You have faith, and I have works. Show me your faith apart from the works, and I shall show you my faith by my works.”
19  You believe there is one God, do you? You are doing quite well. And yet the demons believe and shudder.
20  But do you care to know, O empty man, that faith apart from works is inactive?
21  Was not Abraham our father declared righteous by works after he had offered up Isaac his son upon the altar?
22  You behold that [his] faith worked along with his works and by [his] works [his] faith was perfected,
23  and the scripture was fulfilled which says: “Abraham put faith in Jehovah, and it was counted to him as righteousness,” and he came to be called “Jehovah’s friend.”
24  YOU see that a man is to be declared righteous by works, and not by faith alone.
25  In the same manner was not also Rahab the harlot declared righteous by works, after she had received the messengers hospitably and sent them out by another way?
26  Indeed, as the body without spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead.
james 3
3  Not many of YOU should become teachers, my brothers, knowing that we shall receive heavier judgment.
2  For we all stumble many times. If anyone does not stumble in word, this one is a perfect man, able to bridle also [his] whole body.
3  If we put bridles in the mouths of horses for them to obey us, we manage also their whole body.
4  Look! Even boats, although they are so big and are driven by hard winds, are steered by a very small rudder to where the inclination of the man at the helm wishes.
5  So, too, the tongue is a little member and yet makes great brags. Look! How little a fire it takes to set so great a woodland on fire!
6  Well, the tongue is a fire. The tongue is constituted a world of unrighteousness among our members, for it spots up all the body and sets the wheel of natural life aflame and it is set aflame by Gehenna.
7  For every species of wild beast as well as bird and creeping thing and sea creature is to be tamed and has been tamed by humankind.
8  But the tongue, not one of mankind can get it tamed. An unruly injurious thing, it is full of death-dealing poison.
9  With it we bless Jehovah, even [the] Father, and yet with it we curse men who have come into existence “in the likeness of God.”
10  Out of the same mouth come forth blessing and cursing. It is not proper, my brothers, for these things to go on occurring this way.
11  A fountain does not cause the sweet and the bitter to bubble out of the same opening, does it?
12  My brothers, a fig tree cannot produce olives or a vine figs, can it? Neither can salt water produce sweet water.
13  Who is wise and understanding among YOU? Let him show out of his fine conduct his works with a mildness that belongs to wisdom.
14  But if YOU have bitter jealousy and contentiousness in YOUR hearts, do not be bragging and lying against the truth.
15  This is not the wisdom that comes down from above, but is [the] earthly, animal, demonic.
16  For where jealousy and contentiousness are, there disorder and every vile thing are.
17  But the wisdom from above is first of all chaste, then peaceable, reasonable, ready to obey, full of mercy and good fruits, not making partial distinctions, not hypocritical.
18  Moreover, the fruit of righteousness has its seed sown under peaceful conditions for those who are making peace.
james 4
4  From what source are there wars and from what source are there fights among YOU? Are they not from this source, namely, from YOUR cravings for sensual pleasure that carry on a conflict in YOUR members?
2  YOU desire, and yet YOU do not have. YOU go on murdering and coveting, and yet YOU are not able to obtain. YOU go on fighting and waging war. YOU do not have because of YOUR not asking.
3  YOU do ask, and yet YOU do not receive, because YOU are asking for a wrong purpose, that YOU may expend [it] upon YOUR cravings for sensual pleasure.
4  Adulteresses, do YOU not know that the friendship with the world is enmity with God? Whoever, therefore, wants to be a friend of the world is constituting himself an enemy of God.
5  Or does it seem to YOU that the scripture says to no purpose: “It is with a tendency to envy that the spirit which has taken up residence within us keeps longing”?
6  However, the undeserved kindness which he gives is greater. Hence it says: “God opposes the haughty ones, but he gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones.”
7  Subject yourselves, therefore, to God;  but oppose the Devil, and he will flee from YOU.
8  Draw close to God, and he will draw close to YOU. Cleanse YOUR hands, YOU sinners, and purify YOUR hearts, YOU indecisive ones.
9  Give way to misery and mourn and weep. Let YOUR laughter be turned into mourning, and [YOUR] joy into dejection.
10  Humble yourselves in the eyes of Jehovah, and he will exalt YOU.
11  Quit speaking against one another, brothers. He who speaks against a brother or judges his brother speaks against law and judges law. Now if you judge law, you are, not a doer of law, but a judge.
12  One there is that is lawgiver and judge, he who is able to save and to destroy. But you, who are you to be judging [your] neighbor?
13  Come, now, YOU who say: “Today or tomorrow we will journey to this city and will spend a year there, and we will engage in business and make profits,”
14  whereas YOU do not know what YOUR life will be tomorrow. For YOU are a mist appearing for a little while and then disappearing.
15  Instead, YOU ought to say: “If Jehovah wills, we shall live and also do this or that.”
16  But now YOU take pride in YOUR self-assuming brags. All such taking of pride is wicked.
17  Therefore, if one knows how to do what is right and yet does not do it, it is a sin for him.
james 5
5  Come, now, YOU rich [men], weep, howling over YOUR miseries that are coming upon YOU.
2  YOUR riches have rotted, and YOUR outer garments have become moth-eaten.
3  YOUR gold and silver are rusted away, and their rust will be as a witness against YOU and will eat YOUR fleshy parts. Something like fire is what YOU have stored up in the last days.
4  Look! The wages due the workers who harvested YOUR fields but which are held up by YOU, keep crying out, and the calls for help on the part of the reapers have entered into the ears of Jehovah of armies.
5  YOU have lived in luxury upon the earth and have gone in for sensual pleasure. YOU have fattened YOUR hearts on the day of slaughter.
6  YOU have condemned, YOU have murdered the righteous one. Is he not opposing YOU?
7  Exercise patience, therefore, brothers, until the presence of the Lord. Look! The farmer keeps waiting for the precious fruit of the earth, exercising patience over it until he gets the early rain and the late rain.
8  YOU too exercise patience;  make YOUR hearts firm, because the presence of the Lord has drawn close.
9  Do not heave sighs against one another, brothers, so that YOU do not get judged. Look! The Judge is standing before the doors.
10  Brothers, take as a pattern of the suffering of evil and the exercising of patience the prophets, who spoke in the name of Jehovah.
11  Look! We pronounce happy those who have endured. YOU have heard of the endurance of Job and have seen the outcome Jehovah gave, that Jehovah is very tender in affection and merciful.
12  Above all things, though, my brothers, stop swearing, yes, either by heaven or by earth or by any other oath. But let YOUR Yes mean Yes, and YOUR No, No, so that YOU do not fall under judgment.
13  Is there anyone suffering evil among YOU? Let him carry on prayer. Is there anyone in good spirits? Let him sing psalms.
14  Is there anyone sick among YOU? Let him call the older men of the congregation to [him], and let them pray over him, greasing [him] with oil in the name of Jehovah.
15  And the prayer of faith will make the indisposed one well, and Jehovah will raise him up. Also, if he has committed sins, it will be forgiven him.
16  Therefore openly confess YOUR sins to one another and pray for one another, that YOU may get healed. A righteous man’s supplication, when it is at work, has much force.
17  Elijah was a man with feelings like ours, and yet in prayer he prayed for it not to rain;  and it did not rain upon the land for three years and six months.
18  And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain and the land put forth its fruit.
19  My brothers, if anyone among YOU is misled from the truth and another turns him back,
20  know that he who turns a sinner back from the error of his way will save his soul from death and will cover a multitude of sins.
1 peter 1
1  Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the temporary residents scattered about in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, to the ones chosen
2  according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, with sanctification by the spirit, for the purpose of their being obedient and sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ: May undeserved kindness and peace be increased to YOU.
3  Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for according to his great mercy he gave us a new birth to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
4  to an incorruptible and undefiled and unfading inheritance. It is reserved in the heavens for YOU,
5  who are being safeguarded by God’s power through faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last period of time.
6  In this fact YOU are greatly rejoicing, though for a little while at present, if it must be, YOU have been grieved by various trials,
7  in order that the tested quality of YOUR faith, of much greater value than gold that perishes despite its being proved by fire, may be found a cause for praise and glory and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ.
8  Though YOU never saw him, YOU love him. Though YOU are not looking upon him at present, yet YOU exercise faith in him and are greatly rejoicing with an unspeakable and glorified joy,
9  as YOU receive the end of YOUR faith, the salvation of YOUR souls.
10  Concerning this very salvation a diligent inquiry and a careful search were made by the prophets who prophesied about the undeserved kindness meant for YOU.
11  They kept on investigating what particular season or what sort of [season] the spirit in them was indicating concerning Christ when it was bearing witness beforehand about the sufferings for Christ and about the glories to follow these.
12  It was revealed to them that, not to themselves, but to YOU, they were ministering the things that have now been announced to YOU through those who have declared the good news to YOU with holy spirit sent forth from heaven. Into these very things angels are desiring to peer.
13  Hence brace up YOUR minds for activity, keep YOUR senses completely;  set YOUR hope upon the undeserved kindness that is to be brought to YOU at the revelation of Jesus Christ.
14  As obedient children, quit being fashioned according to the desires YOU formerly had in YOUR ignorance,
15  but, in accord with the Holy One who called YOU, do YOU also become holy yourselves in all [YOUR] conduct,
16  because it is written: “YOU must be holy, because I am holy.”
17  Furthermore, if YOU are calling upon the Father who judges impartially according to each one’s work, conduct yourselves with fear during the time of YOUR alien residence.
18  For YOU know that it was not with corruptible things, with silver or gold, that YOU were delivered from YOUR fruitless form of conduct received by tradition from YOUR forefathers.
19  But it was with precious blood, like that of an unblemished and spotless lamb, even Christ’s.
20  True, he was foreknown before the founding of the world, but he was made manifest at the end of the times for the sake of YOU
21  who through him are believers in God, the one who raised him up from the dead and gave him glory;  so that YOUR faith and hope might be in God.
22  Now that YOU have purified YOUR souls by [YOUR] obedience to the truth with unhypocritical brotherly affection as the result, love one another intensely from the heart.
23  For YOU have been given a new birth, not by corruptible, but by incorruptible [reproductive] seed, through the word of [the] living and enduring God.
24  For “all flesh is like grass, and all its glory is like a blossom of grass;  the grass becomes withered, and the flower falls off,
25  but the saying of Jehovah endures forever.” Well, this is the “saying,” this which has been declared to YOU as good news.
1 peter 2
2  Accordingly, put away all badness and all deceitfulness and hypocrisy and envies and all sorts of backbiting,
2  [and,] as newborn infants, form a longing for the unadulterated milk belonging to the word, that through it YOU may grow to salvation,
3  provided YOU have tasted that the Lord is kind.
4  Coming to him as to a living stone, rejected, it is true, by men, but chosen, precious, with God,
5  YOU yourselves also as living stones are being built up a spiritual house for the purpose of a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
6  For it is contained in Scripture: “Look! I am laying in Zion a stone, chosen, a foundation cornerstone, precious;  and no one exercising faith in it will by any means come to disappointment.”
7  It is to YOU, therefore, that he is precious, because YOU are believers;  but to those not believing, “the identical stone that the builders rejected has become [the] head of [the] corner,”
8  and “a stone of stumbling and a rock-mass of offense.” These are stumbling because they are disobedient to the word. To this very end they were also appointed.
9  But YOU are “a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for special possession, that YOU should declare abroad the excellencies” of the one that called YOU out of darkness into his wonderful light.
10  For YOU were once not a people, but are now God’s people;  YOU were those who had not been shown mercy, but are now those who have been shown mercy.
11  Beloved, I exhort YOU as aliens and temporary residents to keep abstaining from fleshly desires, which are the very ones that carry on a conflict against the soul.
12  Maintain YOUR conduct fine among the nations, that, in the thing in which they are speaking against YOU as evildoers, they may as a result of YOUR fine works of which they are eyewitnesses glorify God in the day for [his] inspection.
13  For the Lord’s sake subject yourselves to every human creation: whether to a king as being superior
14  or to governors as being sent by him to inflict punishment on evildoers but to praise doers of good.
15  For so the will of God is, that by doing good YOU may muzzle the ignorant talk of the unreasonable men.
16  Be as free people, and yet holding YOUR freedom, not as a blind for badness, but as slaves of God.
17  Honor [men] of all sorts, have love for the whole association of brothers, be in fear of God, have honor for the king.
18  Let house servants be in subjection to [their] owners with all [due] fear, not only to the good and reasonable, but also to those hard to please.
19  For if someone, because of conscience toward God, bears up under grievous things and suffers unjustly, this is an agreeable thing.
20  For what merit is there in it if, when YOU are sinning and being slapped, YOU endure it? But if, when YOU are doing good and YOU suffer, YOU endure it, this is a thing agreeable with God.
21  In fact, to this [course] YOU were called, because even Christ suffered for YOU, leaving YOU a model for YOU to follow his steps closely.
22  He committed no sin, nor was deception found in his mouth.
23  When he was being reviled, he did not go reviling in return. When he was suffering, he did not go threatening, but kept on committing himself to the one who judges righteously.
24  He himself bore our sins in his own body upon the stake, in order that we might be done with sins and live to righteousness. And “by his stripes YOU were healed.”
25  For YOU were like sheep, going astray;  but now YOU have returned to the shepherd and overseer of YOUR souls.
1 peter 3
3  In like manner, YOU wives, be in subjection to YOUR own husbands, in order that, if any are not obedient to the word, they may be won without a word through the conduct of [their] wives,
2  because of having been eyewitnesses of YOUR chaste conduct together with deep respect.
3  And do not let YOUR adornment be that of the external braiding of the hair and of the putting on of gold ornaments or the wearing of outer garments,
4  but let it be the secret person of the heart in the incorruptible [apparel] of the quiet and mild spirit, which is of great value in the eyes of God.
5  For so, too, formerly the holy women who were hoping in God used to adorn themselves, subjecting themselves to their own husbands,
6  as Sarah used to obey Abraham, calling him “lord.” And YOU have become her children, provided YOU keep on doing good and not fearing any cause for terror.
7  YOU husbands, continue dwelling in like manner with them according to knowledge, assigning them honor as to a weaker vessel, the feminine one, since YOU are also heirs with them of the undeserved favor of life, in order for YOUR prayers not to be hindered.
8  Finally, all of YOU be like-minded, showing fellow feeling, having brotherly affection, tenderly compassionate, humble in mind,
9  not paying back injury for injury or reviling for reviling, but, to the contrary, bestowing a blessing, because YOU were called to this [course], so that YOU might inherit a blessing.
10  For, “he that would love life and see good days, let him restrain his tongue from what is bad and [his] lips from speaking deception,
11  but let him turn away from what is bad and do what is good;  let him seek peace and pursue it.
12  For [the] eyes of Jehovah are upon the righteous ones, and his ears are toward their supplication;  but [the] face of Jehovah is against those doing bad things.”
13  Indeed, who is the man that will harm YOU if YOU become zealous for what is good?
14  But even if YOU should suffer for the sake of righteousness, YOU are happy. However, the object of their fear do not YOU fear, neither become agitated.
15  But sanctify the Christ as Lord in YOUR hearts, always ready to make a defense before everyone that demands of YOU a reason for the hope in YOU, but doing so together with a mild temper and deep respect.
16  Hold a good conscience, so that in the particular in which YOU are spoken against they may get ashamed who are speaking slightingly of YOUR good conduct in connection with Christ.
17  For it is better to suffer because YOU are doing good, if the will of God wishes it, than because YOU are doing evil.
18  Why, even Christ died once for all time concerning sins, a righteous [person] for unrighteous ones, that he might lead YOU to God, he being put to death in the flesh, but being made alive in the spirit.
19  In this [state] also he went his way and preached to the spirits in prison,
20  who had once been disobedient when the patience of God was waiting in Noah’s days, while the ark was being constructed, in which a few people, that is, eight souls, were carried safely through the water.
21  That which corresponds to this is also now saving YOU, namely, baptism, (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the request made to God for a good conscience,) through the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
22  He is at God’s right hand, for he went his way to heaven;  and angels and authorities and powers were made subject to him.
1 peter 4
4  Therefore since Christ suffered in the flesh, YOU too arm yourselves with the same mental disposition;  because the person that has suffered in the flesh has desisted from sins,
2  to the end that he may live the remainder of [his] time in the flesh, no more for the desires of men, but for God’s will.
3  For the time that has passed by is sufficient for YOU to have worked out the will of the nations when YOU proceeded in deeds of loose conduct, lusts, excesses with wine, revelries, drinking matches, and illegal idolatries.
4  Because YOU do not continue running with them in this course to the same low sink of debauchery, they are puzzled and go on speaking abusively of YOU.
5  But these people will render an account to the one ready to judge those living and those dead.
6  In fact, for this purpose the good news was declared also to the dead, that they might be judged as to the flesh from the standpoint of men but might live as to the spirit from the standpoint of God.
7  But the end of all things has drawn close. Be sound in mind, therefore, and be vigilant with a view to prayers.
8  Above all things, have intense love for one another, because love covers a multitude of sins.
9  Be hospitable to one another without grumbling.
10  In proportion as each one has received a gift, use it in ministering to one another as fine stewards of God’s undeserved kindness expressed in various ways.
11  If anyone speaks, [let him speak] as it were [the] sacred pronouncements of God;  if anyone ministers, [let him minister] as dependent on the strength that God supplies;  so that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ. The glory and the might are his forever and ever. Amen.
12  Beloved ones, do not be puzzled at the burning among YOU, which is happening to YOU for a trial, as though a strange thing were befalling YOU.
13  On the contrary, go on rejoicing forasmuch as YOU are sharers in the sufferings of the Christ, that YOU may rejoice and be overjoyed also during the revelation of his glory.
14  If YOU are being reproached for the name of Christ, YOU are happy, because the [spirit] of glory, even the spirit of God, is resting upon YOU.
15  However, let none of YOU suffer as a murderer or a thief or an evildoer or as a busybody in other people’s matters.
16  But if [he suffers] as a Christian, let him not feel shame, but let him keep on glorifying God in this name.
17  For it is the appointed time for the judgment to start with the house of God. Now if it starts first with us, what will the end be of those who are not obedient to the good news of God?
18  “And if the righteous [man] is being saved with difficulty, where will the ungodly [man] and the sinner make a showing?”
19  So, then, also let those who are suffering in harmony with the will of God keep on commending their souls to a faithful Creator while they are doing good.
1 peter 5
5  Therefore, to the older men among YOU I give this exhortation, for I too am an older man with [them] and a witness of the sufferings of the Christ, a sharer even of the glory that is to be revealed:
2  Shepherd the flock of God in YOUR care, not under compulsion, but willingly;  neither for love of dishonest gain, but eagerly; 
3  neither as lording it over those who are God’s inheritance, but becoming examples to the flock.
4  And when the chief shepherd has been made manifest, YOU will receive the unfadable crown of glory.
5  In like manner, YOU younger men, be in subjection to the older men. But all of YOU gird yourselves with lowliness of mind toward one another, because God opposes the haughty ones, but he gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones.
6  Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt YOU in due time; 
7  while YOU throw all YOUR anxiety upon him, because he cares for YOU.
8  Keep YOUR senses, be watchful. YOUR adversary, the Devil, walks about like a roaring lion, seeking to devour [someone].
9  But take YOUR stand against him, solid in the faith, knowing that the same things in the way of sufferings are being accomplished in the entire association of YOUR brothers in the world.
10  But, after YOU have suffered a little while, the God of all undeserved kindness, who called YOU to his everlasting glory in union with Christ, will himself finish YOUR training, he will make YOU firm, he will make YOU strong.
11  To him be the might forever. Amen.
12  Through Silvanus, a faithful brother, as I account him, I have written YOU in few [words], to give encouragement and an earnest witness that this is the true undeserved kindness of God;  in which stand firm.
13  She who is in Babylon, a chosen one like [YOU], sends YOU her greetings, and so does Mark my son.
14  Greet one another with a kiss of love. May all of YOU who are in union with Christ have peace.
2 peter 1
1  Simon Peter, a slave and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who have obtained a faith, held in equal privilege with ours, by the righteousness of our God and [the] Savior Jesus Christ:
2  May undeserved kindness and peace be increased to YOU by an accurate knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord,
3  forasmuch as his divine power has given us freely all the things that concern life and godly devotion, through the accurate knowledge of the one who called us through glory and virtue.
4  Through these things he has freely given us the precious and very grand promises, that through these YOU may become sharers in divine nature, having escaped from the corruption that is in the world through lust.
5  Yes, for this very reason, by YOUR contributing in response all earnest effort, supply to YOUR faith virtue, to [YOUR] virtue knowledge,
6  to [YOUR] knowledge self-control, to [YOUR] self-control endurance, to [YOUR] endurance godly devotion,
7  to [YOUR] godly devotion brotherly affection, to [YOUR] brotherly affection love.
8  For if these things exist in YOU and overflow, they will prevent YOU from being either inactive or unfruitful regarding the accurate knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
9  For if these things are not present in anyone, he is blind, shutting his eyes [to the light], and has become forgetful of his cleansing from his sins of long ago.
10  For this reason, brothers, all the more do YOUR utmost to make the calling and choosing of YOU sure for yourselves;  for if YOU keep on doing these things YOU will by no means ever fail.
11  In fact, thus there will be richly supplied to YOU the entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
12  For this reason I shall be disposed always to remind YOU of these things, although YOU know [them] and are firmly set in the truth that is present [in YOU].
13  But I consider it right, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to rouse YOU up by way of reminding YOU,
14  knowing as I do that the putting off of my tabernacle is soon to be, just as also our Lord Jesus Christ signified to me.
15  So I will do my utmost also at every time that, after my departure, YOU may be able to make mention of these things for yourselves.
16  No, it was not by following artfully contrived false stories that we acquainted YOU with the power and presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, but it was by having become eyewitnesses of his magnificence.
17  For he received from God the Father honor and glory, when words such as these were borne to him by the magnificent glory: “This is my son, my beloved, whom I myself have approved.”
18  Yes, these words we heard borne from heaven while we were with him in the holy mountain.
19  Consequently we have the prophetic word [made] more sure;  and YOU are doing well in paying attention to it as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until day dawns and a daystar rises, in YOUR hearts.
20  For YOU know this first, that no prophecy of Scripture springs from any private interpretation.
21  For prophecy was at no time brought by man’s will, but men spoke from God as they were borne along by holy spirit.
2 peter 2
2  However, there also came to be false prophets among the people, as there will also be false teachers among YOU. These very ones will quietly bring in destructive sects and will disown even the owner that bought them, bringing speedy destruction upon themselves.
2  Furthermore, many will follow their acts of loose conduct, and on account of these the way of the truth will be spoken of abusively.
3  Also, with covetousness they will exploit YOU with counterfeit words. But as for them, the judgment from of old is not moving slowly, and the destruction of them is not slumbering.
4  Certainly if God did not hold back from punishing the angels that sinned, but, by throwing them into Tartarus, delivered them to pits of dense darkness to be reserved for judgment; 
5  and he did not hold back from punishing an ancient world, but kept Noah, a preacher of righteousness, safe with seven others when he brought a deluge upon a world of ungodly people; 
6  and by reducing the cities Sodom and Gomorrah to ashes he condemned them, setting a pattern for ungodly persons of things to come; 
7  and he delivered righteous Lot, who was greatly distressed by the indulgence of the law-defying people in loose conduct—
8  for that righteous man by what he saw and heard while dwelling among them from day to day was tormenting his righteous soul by reason of their lawless deeds—
9  Jehovah knows how to deliver people of godly devotion out of trial, but to reserve unrighteous people for the day of judgment to be cut off,
10  especially, however, those who go on after flesh with the desire to defile [it] and who look down on lordship. Daring, self-willed, they do not tremble at glorious ones but speak abusively,
11  whereas angels, although they are greater in strength and power, do not bring against them an accusation in abusive terms, [not doing so] out of respect for Jehovah.
12  But these [men], like unreasoning animals born naturally to be caught and destroyed, will, in the things of which they are ignorant and speak abusively, even suffer destruction in their own [course of] destruction,
13  wronging themselves as a reward for wrongdoing. They consider luxurious living in the daytime a pleasure. They are spots and blemishes, indulging with unrestrained delight in their deceptive teachings while feasting together with YOU.
14  They have eyes full of adultery and unable to desist from sin, and they entice unsteady souls. They have a heart trained in covetousness. They are accursed children.
15  Abandoning the straight path, they have been misled. They have followed the path of Balaam, [the son] of Beor, who loved the reward of wrongdoing,
16  but got a reproof for his own violation of what was right. A voiceless beast of burden, making utterance with the voice of a man, hindered the prophet’s mad course.
17  These are fountains without water, and mists driven by a violent storm, and for them the blackness of darkness has been reserved.
18  For they utter swelling expressions of no profit, and by the desires of the flesh and by loose habits they entice those who are just escaping from people who conduct themselves in error.
19  While they are promising them freedom, they themselves are existing as slaves of corruption. For whoever is overcome by another is enslaved by this one.
20  Certainly if, after having escaped from the defilements of the world by an accurate knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they get involved again with these very things and are overcome, the final conditions have become worse for them than the first.
21  For it would have been better for them not to have accurately known the path of righteousness than after knowing it accurately to turn away from the holy commandment delivered to them.
22  The saying of the true proverb has happened to them: “The dog has returned to its own vomit, and the sow that was bathed to rolling in the mire.”
2 peter 3
3  Beloved ones, this is now the second letter I am writing YOU, in which, as in my first one, I am arousing YOUR clear thinking faculties by way of a reminder,
2  that YOU should remember the sayings previously spoken by the holy prophets and the commandment of the Lord and Savior through YOUR apostles.
3  For YOU know this first, that in the last days there will come ridiculers with their ridicule, proceeding according to their own desires
4  and saying: “Where is this promised presence of his? Why, from the day our forefathers fell asleep [in death], all things are continuing exactly as from creation’s beginning.”
5  For, according to their wish, this fact escapes their notice, that there were heavens from of old and an earth standing compactly out of water and in the midst of water by the word of God; 
6  and by those [means] the world of that time suffered destruction when it was deluged with water.
7  But by the same word the heavens and the earth that are now are stored up for fire and are being reserved to the day of judgment and of destruction of the ungodly men.
8  However, let this one fact not be escaping YOUR notice, beloved ones, that one day is with Jehovah as a thousand years and a thousand years as one day.
9  Jehovah is not slow respecting his promise, as some people consider slowness, but he is patient with YOU because he does not desire any to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance.
10  Yet Jehovah’s day will come as a thief, in which the heavens will pass away with a hissing noise, but the elements being intensely hot will be dissolved, and earth and the works in it will be discovered.
11  Since all these things are thus to be dissolved, what sort of persons ought YOU to be in holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion,
12  awaiting and keeping close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah, through which [the] heavens being on fire will be dissolved and [the] elements being intensely hot will melt!
13  But there are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his promise, and in these righteousness is to dwell.
14  Hence, beloved ones, since YOU are awaiting these things, do YOUR utmost to be found finally by him spotless and unblemished and in peace.
15  Furthermore, consider the patience of our Lord as salvation, just as our beloved brother Paul according to the wisdom given him also wrote YOU,
16  speaking about these things as he does also in all [his] letters. In them, however, are some things hard to understand, which the untaught and unsteady are twisting, as [they do] also the rest of the Scriptures, to their own destruction.
17  YOU, therefore, beloved ones, having this advance knowledge, be on YOUR guard that YOU may not be led away with them by the error of the law-defying people and fall from YOUR own steadfastness.
18  No, but go on growing in the undeserved kindness and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him [be] the glory both now and to the day of eternity.
1 john 1
1  That which was from [the] beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have viewed attentively and our hands felt, concerning the word of life,
2  (yes, the life was made manifest, and we have seen and are bearing witness and reporting to YOU the everlasting life which was with the Father and was made manifest to us,)
3  that which we have seen and heard we are reporting also to YOU, that YOU too may be having a sharing with us. Furthermore, this sharing of ours is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ.
4  And so we are writing these things that our joy may be in full measure.
5  And this is the message which we have heard from him and are announcing to YOU, that God is light and there is no darkness at all in union with him.
6  If we make the statement: “We are having a sharing with him,” and yet we go on walking in the darkness, we are lying and are not practicing the truth.
7  However, if we are walking in the light as he himself is in the light, we do have a sharing with one another, and the blood of Jesus his Son cleanses us from all sin.
8  If we make the statement: “We have no sin,” we are misleading ourselves and the truth is not in us.
9  If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous so as to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
10  If we make the statement: “We have not sinned,” we are making him a liar, and his word is not in us.
1 john 2
2  My little children, I am writing YOU these things that YOU may not commit a sin. And yet, if anyone does commit a sin, we have a helper with the Father, Jesus Christ, a righteous one.
2  And he is a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins, yet not for ours only but also for the whole world’s.
3  And by this we have the knowledge that we have come to know him, namely, if we continue observing his commandments.
4  He that says: “I have come to know him,” and yet is not observing his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in this [person].
5  But whoever does observe his word, truthfully in this [person] the love of God has been made perfect. By this we have the knowledge that we are in union with him.
6  He that says he remains in union with him is under obligation himself also to go on walking just as that one walked.
7  Beloved ones, I am writing YOU, not a new commandment, but an old commandment which YOU have had from [the] beginning. This old commandment is the word which YOU heard.
8  Again, I am writing YOU a new commandment, a fact that is true in his case and in YOURS, because the darkness is passing away and the true light is already shining.
9  He that says he is in the light and yet hates his brother is in the darkness up to right now.
10  He that loves his brother remains in the light, and there is no cause for stumbling in his case.
11  But he that hates his brother is in the darkness and is walking in the darkness, and he does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
12  I am writing YOU, little children, because YOUR sins have been forgiven YOU for the sake of his name.
13  I am writing YOU, fathers, because YOU have come to know him who is from [the] beginning. I am writing YOU, young men, because YOU have conquered the wicked one. I write YOU, young children, because YOU have come to know the Father.
14  I write YOU, fathers, because YOU have come to know him who is from [the] beginning. I write YOU, young men, because YOU are strong and the word of God remains in YOU and YOU have conquered the wicked one.
15  Do not be loving either the world or the things in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him; 
16  because everything in the world—the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the showy display of one’s means of life—does not originate with the Father, but originates with the world.
17  Furthermore, the world is passing away and so is its desire, but he that does the will of God remains forever.
18  Young children, it is the last hour, and, just as YOU have heard that antichrist is coming, even now there have come to be many antichrists;  from which fact we gain the knowledge that it is the last hour.
19  They went out from us, but they were not of our sort;  for if they had been of our sort, they would have remained with us. But [they went out] that it might be shown up that not all are of our sort.
20  And YOU have an anointing from the holy one;  all of YOU have knowledge.
21  I write YOU, not because YOU do not know the truth, but because YOU know it, and because no lie originates with the truth.
22  Who is the liar if it is not the one that denies that Jesus is the Christ? This is the antichrist, the one that denies the Father and the Son.
23  Everyone that denies the Son does not have the Father either. He that confesses the Son has the Father also.
24  As for YOU, let that which YOU have heard from [the] beginning remain in YOU. If that which YOU have heard from [the] beginning remains in YOU, YOU will also abide in union with the Son and in union with the Father.
25  Furthermore, this is the promised thing that he himself promised us, the life everlasting.
26  These things I write YOU about those who are trying to mislead YOU.
27  And as for YOU, the anointing that YOU received from him remains in YOU, and YOU do not need anyone to be teaching YOU;  but, as the anointing from him is teaching YOU about all things, and is true and is no lie, and just as it has taught YOU, remain in union with him.
28  So now, little children, remain in union with him, that when he is made manifest we may have freeness of speech and not be shamed away from him at his presence.
29  If YOU know that he is righteous, YOU gain the knowledge that everyone who practices righteousness has been born from him.
1 john 3
3  See what sort of love the Father has given us, so that we should be called children of God;  and such we are. That is why the world does not have a knowledge of us, because it has not come to know him.
2  Beloved ones, now we are children of God, but as yet it has not been made manifest what we shall be. We do know that whenever he is made manifest we shall be like him, because we shall see him just as he is.
3  And everyone who has this hope set upon him purifies himself just as that one is pure.
4  Everyone who practices sin is also practicing lawlessness, and so sin is lawlessness.
5  YOU know too that that one was made manifest to take away [our] sins, and there is no sin in him.
6  Everyone remaining in union with him does not practice sin;  no one that practices sin has either seen him or come to know him.
7  Little children, let no one mislead YOU;  he who carries on righteousness is righteous, just as that one is righteous.
8  He who carries on sin originates with the Devil, because the Devil has been sinning from [the] beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was made manifest, namely, to break up the works of the Devil.
9  Everyone who has been born from God does not carry on sin, because His [reproductive] seed remains in such one, and he cannot practice sin, because he has been born from God.
10  The children of God and the children of the Devil are evident by this fact: Everyone who does not carry on righteousness does not originate with God, neither does he who does not love his brother.
11  For this is the message which YOU have heard from [the] beginning, that we should have love for one another; 
12  not like Cain, who originated with the wicked one and slaughtered his brother. And for the sake of what did he slaughter him? Because his own works were wicked, but those of his brother [were] righteous.
13  Do not marvel, brothers, that the world hates YOU.
14  We know we have passed over from death to life, because we love the brothers. He who does not love remains in death.
15  Everyone who hates his brother is a manslayer, and YOU know that no manslayer has everlasting life remaining in him.
16  By this we have come to know love, because that one surrendered his soul for us;  and we are under obligation to surrender [our] souls for [our] brothers.
17  But whoever has this world’s means for supporting life and beholds his brother having need and yet shuts the door of his tender compassions upon him, in what way does the love of God remain in him?
18  Little children, let us love, neither in word nor with the tongue, but in deed and truth.
19  By this we shall know that we originate with the truth, and we shall assure our hearts before him
20  as regards whatever our hearts may condemn us in, because God is greater than our hearts and knows all things.
21  Beloved ones, if [our] hearts do not condemn [us], we have freeness of speech toward God; 
22  and whatever we ask we receive from him, because we are observing his commandments and are doing the things that are pleasing in his eyes.
23  Indeed, this is his commandment, that we have faith in the name of his Son Jesus Christ and be loving one another, just as he gave us commandment.
24  Moreover, he who observes his commandments remains in union with him, and he in union with such one;  and by this we gain the knowledge that he is remaining in union with us, owing to the spirit which he gave us.
1 john 4
4  Beloved ones, do not believe every inspired expression, but test the inspired expressions to see whether they originate with God, because many false prophets have gone forth into the world.
2  YOU gain the knowledge of the inspired expression from God by this: Every inspired expression that confesses Jesus Christ as having come in the flesh originates with God,
3  but every inspired expression that does not confess Jesus does not originate with God. Furthermore, this is the antichrist’s [inspired expression] which YOU have heard was coming, and now it is already in the world.
4  YOU originate with God, little children, and YOU have conquered those [persons], because he that is in union with YOU is greater than he that is in union with the world.
5  They originate with the world;  that is why they speak [what proceeds] from the world and the world listens to them.
6  We originate with God. He that gains the knowledge of God listens to us;  he that does not originate with God does not listen to us. This is how we take note of the inspired expression of truth and the inspired expression of error.
7  Beloved ones, let us continue loving one another, because love is from God, and everyone who loves has been born from God and gains the knowledge of God.
8  He that does not love has not come to know God, because God is love.
9  By this the love of God was made manifest in our case, because God sent forth his only-begotten Son into the world that we might gain life through him.
10  The love is in this respect, not that we have loved God, but that he loved us and sent forth his Son as a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins.
11  Beloved ones, if this is how God loved us, then we are ourselves under obligation to love one another.
12  At no time has anyone beheld God. If we continue loving one another, God remains in us and his love is made perfect in us.
13  By this we gain the knowledge that we are remaining in union with him and he in union with us, because he has imparted his spirit to us.
14  In addition, we ourselves have beheld and are bearing witness that the Father has sent forth his Son as Savior of the world.
15  Whoever makes the confession that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, God remains in union with such one and he in union with God.
16  And we ourselves have come to know and have believed the love that God has in our case. God is love, and he that remains in love remains in union with God and God remains in union with him.
17  This is how love has been made perfect with us, that we may have freeness of speech in the day of judgment, because, just as that one is, so are we ourselves in this world.
18  There is no fear in love, but perfect love throws fear outside, because fear exercises a restraint. Indeed, he that is under fear has not been made perfect in love.
19  As for us, we love, because he first loved us.
20  If anyone makes the statement: “I love God,” and yet is hating his brother, he is a liar. For he who does not love his brother, whom he has seen, cannot be loving God, whom he has not seen.
21  And this commandment we have from him, that the one who loves God should be loving his brother also.
1 john 5
5  Everyone believing that Jesus is the Christ has been born from God, and everyone who loves the one that caused to be born loves him who has been born from that one.
2  By this we gain the knowledge that we are loving the children of God, when we are loving God and doing his commandments.
3  For this is what the love of God means, that we observe his commandments;  and yet his commandments are not burdensome,
4  because everything that has been born from God conquers the world. And this is the conquest that has conquered the world, our faith.
5  Who is the one that conquers the world but he who has faith that Jesus is the Son of God?
6  This is he that came by means of water and blood, Jesus Christ;  not with the water only, but with the water and with the blood. And the spirit is that which is bearing witness, because the spirit is the truth.
7  For there are three witness bearers,
8  the spirit and the water and the blood, and the three are in agreement.
9  If we receive the witness men give, the witness God gives is greater, because this is the witness God gives, the fact that he has borne witness concerning his Son.
10  The [person] putting his faith in the Son of God has the witness given in his own case. The [person] not having faith in God has made him a liar, because he has not put his faith in the witness given, which God as witness has given concerning his Son.
11  And this is the witness given, that God gave us everlasting life, and this life is in his Son.
12  He that has the Son has this life;  he that does not have the Son of God does not have this life.
13  I write YOU these things that YOU may know that YOU have life everlasting, YOU who put YOUR faith in the name of the Son of God.
14  And this is the confidence that we have toward him, that, no matter what it is that we ask according to his will, he hears us.
15  Further, if we know he hears us respecting whatever we are asking, we know we are to have the things asked since we have asked them of him.
16  If anyone catches sight of his brother sinning a sin that does not incur death, he will ask, and he will give life to him, yes, to those not sinning so as to incur death. There is a sin that does incur death. It is concerning that sin that I do not tell him to make request.
17  All unrighteousness is sin;  and yet there is a sin that does not incur death.
18  We know that every [person] that has been born from God does not practice sin, but the One born from God watches him, and the wicked one does not fasten his hold on him.
19  We know we originate with God, but the whole world is lying in the [power of the] wicked one.
20  But we know that the Son of God has come, and he has given us intellectual capacity that we may gain the knowledge of the true one. And we are in union with the true one, by means of his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and life everlasting.
21  Little children, guard yourselves from idols.
2 john 1
1  The older man to the chosen lady and to her children, whom I truly love, and not I alone, but all those also who have come to know the truth,
2  because of the truth that remains in us, and it will be with us forever.
3  There will be with us undeserved kindness, mercy [and] peace from God the Father and from Jesus Christ the Son of the Father, with truth and love.
4  I rejoice very much because I have found certain ones of your children walking in the truth, just as we received commandment from the Father.
5  So now I request you, lady, as [a person] writing you, not a new commandment, but one which we had from [the] beginning, that we love one another.
6  And this is what love means, that we go on walking according to his commandments. This is the commandment, just as YOU people have heard from [the] beginning, that YOU should go on walking in it.
7  For many deceivers have gone forth into the world, persons not confessing Jesus Christ as coming in the flesh. This is the deceiver and the antichrist.
8  Look out for yourselves, that YOU do not lose the things we have worked to produce, but that YOU may obtain a full reward.
9  Everyone that pushes ahead and does not remain in the teaching of the Christ does not have God. He that does remain in this teaching is the one that has both the Father and the Son.
10  If anyone comes to YOU and does not bring this teaching, never receive him into YOUR homes or say a greeting to him.
11  For he that says a greeting to him is a sharer in his wicked works.
12  Although I have many things to write YOU, I do not desire to do so with paper and ink, but I am hoping to come to YOU and to speak with YOU face to face, that YOUR joy may be in full measure.
13  The children of your sister, the chosen one, send you their greetings.
3 john 1
1  The older man to Gaius, the beloved, whom I truly love.
2  Beloved one, I pray that in all things you may be prospering and having good health, just as your soul is prospering.
3  For I rejoiced very much when brothers came and bore witness to the truth you hold, just as you go on walking in the truth.
4  No greater cause for thankfulness do I have than these things, that I should be hearing that my children go on walking in the truth.
5  Beloved one, you are doing a faithful work in whatever you do for the brothers, and strangers at that,
6  who have borne witness to your love before the congregation. These you will please send on their way in a manner worthy of God.
7  For it was in behalf of [his] name that they went forth, not taking anything from the people of the nations.
8  We, therefore, are under obligation to receive such persons hospitably, that we may become fellow workers in the truth.
9  I wrote something to the congregation, but Diotrephes, who likes to have the first place among them, does not receive anything from us with respect.
10  That is why, if I come, I will call to remembrance his works which he goes on doing, chattering about us with wicked words. Also, not being content with these things, neither does he himself receive the brothers with respect, and those who are wanting to receive them he tries to hinder and to throw out of the congregation.
11  Beloved one, be an imitator, not of what is bad, but of what is good. He that does good originates with God. He that does bad has not seen God.
12  Demetrius has had witness borne to him by them all and by the truth itself. In fact, we, also, are bearing witness, and you know that the witness we give is true.
13  I had many things to write you, yet I do not wish to go on writing you with ink and pen.
14  But I am hoping to see you directly, and we shall speak face to face. May you have peace. The friends send you their greetings. Give my greetings to the friends by name.
jude 1
1  Jude, a slave of Jesus Christ, but a brother of James, to the called ones who are loved in relationship with God [the] Father and preserved for Jesus Christ:
2  May mercy and peace and love be increased to YOU.
3  Beloved ones, though I was making every effort to write YOU about the salvation we hold in common, I found it necessary to write YOU to exhort YOU to put up a hard fight for the faith that was once for all time delivered to the holy ones.
4  My reason is that certain men have slipped in who have long ago been appointed by the Scriptures to this judgment, ungodly men, turning the undeserved kindness of our God into an excuse for loose conduct and proving false to our only Owner and Lord, Jesus Christ.
5  I desire to remind YOU, despite YOUR knowing all things once for all time, that Jehovah, although he saved a people out of the land of Egypt, afterwards destroyed those not showing faith.
6  And the angels that did not keep their original position but forsook their own proper dwelling place he has reserved with eternal bonds under dense darkness for the judgment of the great day.
7  So too Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities about them, after they in the same manner as the foregoing ones had committed fornication excessively and gone out after flesh for unnatural use, are placed before [us] as a [warning] example by undergoing the judicial punishment of everlasting fire.
8  In like manner, notwithstanding, these men, too, indulging in dreams, are defiling the flesh and disregarding lordship and speaking abusively of glorious ones.
9  But when Michael the archangel had a difference with the Devil and was disputing about Moses’ body, he did not dare to bring a judgment against him in abusive terms, but said: “May Jehovah rebuke you.”
10  Yet these [men] are speaking abusively of all the things they really do not know;  but all the things that they do understand naturally like the unreasoning animals, in these things they go on corrupting themselves.
11  Too bad for them, because they have gone in the path of Cain, and have rushed into the erroneous course of Balaam for reward, and have perished in the rebellious talk of Korah!
12  These are the rocks hidden below water in YOUR love feasts while they feast with YOU, shepherds that feed themselves without fear;  waterless clouds carried this way and that by winds;  trees in late autumn, [but] fruitless, having died twice, having been uprooted; 
13  wild waves of the sea that foam up their own causes for shame;  stars with no set course, for which the blackness of darkness stands reserved forever.
14  Yes, the seventh one [in line] from Adam, Enoch, prophesied also regarding them, when he said: “Look! Jehovah came with his holy myriads,
15  to execute judgment against all, and to convict all the ungodly concerning all their ungodly deeds that they did in an ungodly way, and concerning all the shocking things that ungodly sinners spoke against him.”
16  These men are murmurers, complainers about their lot in life, proceeding according to their own desires, and their mouths speak swelling things, while they are admiring personalities for the sake of [their own] benefit.
17  As for YOU, beloved ones, call to mind the sayings that have been previously spoken by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ,
18  how they used to say to YOU: “In the last time there will be ridiculers, proceeding according to their own desires for ungodly things.”
19  These are the ones that make separations, animalistic [men], not having spirituality.
20  But YOU, beloved ones, by building up yourselves on YOUR most holy faith, and praying with holy spirit,
21  keep yourselves in God’s love, while YOU are waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ with everlasting life in view.
22  Also, continue showing mercy to some that have doubts; 
23  save [them] by snatching [them] out of the fire. But continue showing mercy to others, doing so with fear, while YOU hate even the inner garment that has been stained by the flesh.
24  Now to the one who is able to guard YOU from stumbling and to set YOU unblemished in the sight of his glory with great joy,
25  to [the] only God our Savior through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty, might and authority for all past eternity and now and into all eternity. Amen.
revelation 1
1  A revelation by Jesus Christ, which God gave him, to show his slaves the things that must shortly take place. And he sent forth his angel and presented [it] in signs through him to his slave John,
2  who bore witness to the word God gave and to the witness Jesus Christ gave, even to all the things he saw.
3  Happy is he who reads aloud and those who hear the words of this prophecy, and who observe the things written in it;  for the appointed time is near.
4  John to the seven congregations that are in the [district of] Asia: May YOU have undeserved kindness and peace from “The One who is and who was and who is coming,” and from the seven spirits that are before his throne,
5  and from Jesus Christ, “the Faithful Witness,” “The firstborn from the dead,” and “The Ruler of the kings of the earth.” To him that loves us and that loosed us from our sins by means of his own blood—
6  and he made us to be a kingdom, priests to his God and Father—yes, to him be the glory and the might forever. Amen.
7  Look! He is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see him, and those who pierced him;  and all the tribes of the earth will beat themselves in grief because of him. Yes, Amen.
8  “I am the Alpha and the Omega,” says Jehovah God, “the One who is and who was and who is coming, the Almighty.”
9  I John, YOUR brother and a sharer with YOU in the tribulation and kingdom and endurance in company with Jesus, came to be in the isle that is called Patmos for speaking about God and bearing witness to Jesus.
10  By inspiration I came to be in the Lord’s day, and I heard behind me a strong voice like that of a trumpet,
11  saying: “What you see write in a scroll and send it to the seven congregations, in Ephesus and in Smyrna and in Pergamum and in Thyatira and in Sardis and in Philadelphia and in Laodicea.”
12  And I turned to see the voice that was speaking with me, and, having turned, I saw seven golden lampstands,
13  and in the midst of the lampstands someone like a son of man, clothed with a garment that reached down to the feet, and girded at the breasts with a golden girdle.
14  Moreover, his head and his hair were white as white wool, as snow, and his eyes as a fiery flame; 
15  and his feet were like fine copper when glowing in a furnace;  and his voice was as the sound of many waters.
16  And he had in his right hand seven stars, and out of his mouth a sharp, long two-edged sword was protruding, and his countenance was as the sun when it shines in its power.
17  And when I saw him, I fell as dead at his feet. And he laid his right hand upon me and said: “Do not be fearful. I am the First and the Last,
18  and the living one;  and I became dead, but, look! I am living forever and ever, and I have the keys of death and of Hades.
19  Therefore write down the things you saw, and the things that are and the things that will take place after these.
20  As for the sacred secret of the seven stars that you saw upon my right hand, and [of] the seven golden lampstands: The seven stars mean [the] angels of the seven congregations, and the seven lampstands mean seven congregations.
revelation 2
2  “To the angel of the congregation in Ephesus write: These are the things that he says who holds the seven stars in his right hand, he who walks in the midst of the seven golden lampstands,
2  ‘I know your deeds, and your labor and endurance, and that you cannot bear bad men, and that you put those to the test who say they are apostles, but they are not, and you found them liars.
3  You are also showing endurance, and you have borne up for my name’s sake and have not grown weary.
4  Nevertheless, I hold [this] against you, that you have left the love you had at first.
5  “‘Therefore remember from what you have fallen, and repent and do the former deeds. If you do not, I am coming to you, and I will remove your lampstand from its place, unless you repent.
6  Still, you do have this, that you hate the deeds of the sect of Nicolaus, which I also hate.
7  Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations: To him that conquers I will grant to eat of the tree of life, which is in the paradise of God.’
8  “And to the angel of the congregation in Smyrna write: These are the things that he says, ‘the First and the Last,’ who became dead and came to life [again],
9  ‘I know your tribulation and poverty—but you are rich—and the blasphemy by those who say they themselves are Jews, and yet they are not but are a synagogue of Satan.
10  Do not be afraid of the things you are about to suffer. Look! The Devil will keep on throwing some of YOU into prison that YOU may be fully put to the test, and that YOU may have tribulation ten days. Prove yourself faithful even to death, and I will give you the crown of life.
11  Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations: He that conquers will by no means be harmed by the second death.’
12  “And to the angel of the congregation in Pergamum write: These are the things that he says who has the sharp, long two-edged sword,
13  ‘I know where you are dwelling, that is, where the throne of Satan is;  and yet you keep on holding fast my name, and you did not deny your faith in me even in the days of Antipas, my witness, the faithful one, who was killed by YOUR side, where Satan is dwelling.
14  “‘Nevertheless, I have a few things against you, that you have there those holding fast the teaching of Balaam, who went teaching Balak to put a stumbling block before the sons of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to idols and to commit fornication.
15  So you, also, have those holding fast the teaching of the sect of Nicolaus likewise.
16  Therefore repent. If you do not, I am coming to you quickly, and I will war with them with the long sword of my mouth.
17  “‘Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations: To him that conquers I will give some of the hidden manna, and I will give him a white pebble, and upon the pebble a new name written which no one knows except the one receiving it.’
18  “And to the angel of the congregation in Thyatira write: These are the things that the Son of God says, he who has his eyes like a fiery flame, and his feet are like fine copper,
19  ‘I know your deeds, and your love and faith and ministry and endurance, and that your deeds of late are more than those formerly.
20  “‘Nevertheless, I do hold [this] against you, that you tolerate that woman Jezebel, who calls herself a prophetess, and she teaches and misleads my slaves to commit fornication and to eat things sacrificed to idols.
21  And I gave her time to repent, but she is not willing to repent of her fornication.
22  Look! I am about to throw her into a sickbed, and those committing adultery with her into great tribulation, unless they repent of her deeds.
23  And her children I will kill with deadly plague, so that all the congregations will know that I am he who searches the kidneys and hearts, and I will give to YOU individually according to YOUR deeds.
24  “‘However, I say to the rest of YOU who are in Thyatira, all those who do not have this teaching, the very ones who did not get to know the “deep things of Satan,” as they say: I am not putting upon YOU any other burden.
25  Just the same, hold fast what YOU have until I come.
26  And to him that conquers and observes my deeds down to the end I will give authority over the nations,
27  and he shall shepherd the people with an iron rod so that they will be broken to pieces like clay vessels, the same as I have received from my Father,
28  and I will give him the morning star.
29  Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations.’
revelation 3
3  “And to the angel of the congregation in Sardis write: These are the things that he says who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars, ‘I know your deeds, that you have the name that you are alive, but you are dead.
2  Become watchful, and strengthen the things remaining that were ready to die, for I have not found your deeds fully performed before my God.
3  Therefore, continue mindful of how you have received and how you heard, and go on keeping [it], and repent. Certainly unless you wake up, I shall come as a thief, and you will not know at all at what hour I shall come upon you.
4  “‘Nevertheless, you do have a few names in Sardis that did not defile their outer garments, and they shall walk with me in white ones, because they are worthy.
5  He that conquers will thus be arrayed in white outer garments;  and I will by no means blot out his name from the book of life, but I will make acknowledgment of his name before my Father and before his angels.
6  Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations.’
7  “And to the angel of the congregation in Philadelphia write: These are the things he says who is holy, who is true, who has the key of David, who opens so that no one will shut, and shuts so that no one opens,
8  ‘I know your deeds—look! I have set before you an opened door, which no one can shut—that you have a little power, and you kept my word and did not prove false to my name.
9  Look! I will give those from the synagogue of Satan who say they are Jews, and yet they are not but are lying—look! I will make them come and do obeisance before your feet and make them know I have loved you.
10  Because you kept the word about my endurance, I will also keep you from the hour of test, which is to come upon the whole inhabited earth, to put a test upon those dwelling on the earth.
11  I am coming quickly. Keep on holding fast what you have, that no one may take your crown.
12  “‘The one that conquers—I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God, and he will by no means go out [from it] anymore, and I will write upon him the name of my God and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem which descends out of heaven from my God, and that new name of mine.
13  Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations.’
14  “And to the angel of the congregation in Laodicea write: These are the things that the Amen says, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation by God,
15  ‘I know your deeds, that you are neither cold nor hot. I wish you were cold or else hot.
16  So, because you are lukewarm and neither hot nor cold, I am going to vomit you out of my mouth.
17  Because you say: “I am rich and have acquired riches and do not need anything at all,” but you do not know you are miserable and pitiable and poor and blind and naked,
18  I advise you to buy from me gold refined by fire that you may become rich, and white outer garments that you may become dressed and that the shame of your nakedness may not become manifested, and eyesalve to rub in your eyes that you may see.
19  “‘All those for whom I have affection I reprove and discipline. Therefore be zealous and repent.
20  Look! I am standing at the door and knocking. If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I will come into his [house] and take the evening meal with him and he with me.
21  To the one that conquers I will grant to sit down with me on my throne, even as I conquered and sat down with my Father on his throne.
22  Let the one who has an ear hear what the spirit says to the congregations.’”
revelation 4
4  After these things I saw, and, look! an opened door in heaven, and the first voice that I heard was as of a trumpet, speaking with me, saying: “Come on up here, and I shall show you the things that must take place.”
2  After these things I immediately came to be in [the power of the] spirit: and, look! a throne was in its position in heaven, and there is one seated upon the throne.
3  And the one seated is, in appearance, like a jasper stone and a precious red-colored stone, and round about the throne [there is] a rainbow like an emerald in appearance.
4  And round about the throne [there are] twenty-four thrones, and upon these thrones [I saw] seated twenty-four elders dressed in white outer garments, and upon their heads golden crowns.
5  And out of the throne there are proceeding lightnings and voices and thunders;  and [there are] seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, and these mean the seven spirits of God.
6  And before the throne there is, as it were, a glassy sea like crystal. And in the midst of the throne and around the throne [there are] four living creatures that are full of eyes in front and behind.
7  And the first living creature is like a lion, and the second living creature is like a young bull, and the third living creature has a face like a man’s, and the fourth living creature is like a flying eagle.
8  And as for the four living creatures, each one of them respectively has six wings;  round about and underneath they are full of eyes. And they have no rest day and night as they say: “Holy, holy, holy is Jehovah God, the Almighty, who was and who is and who is coming.”
9  And whenever the living creatures offer glory and honor and thanksgiving to the one seated upon the throne, the one that lives forever and ever,
10  the twenty-four elders fall down before the One seated upon the throne and worship the One that lives forever and ever, and they cast their crowns before the throne, saying:
11  “You are worthy, Jehovah, even our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they existed and were created.”
revelation 5
5  And I saw in the right hand of the One seated upon the throne a scroll written within and on the reverse side, sealed tight with seven seals.
2  And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice: “Who is worthy to open the scroll and loose its seals?”
3  But neither in heaven nor upon earth nor underneath the earth was there a single one able to open the scroll or to look into it.
4  And I gave way to a great deal of weeping because no one was found worthy to open the scroll or to look into it.
5  But one of the elders says to me: “Stop weeping. Look! The Lion that is of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, has conquered so as to open the scroll and its seven seals.”
6  And I saw standing in the midst of the throne and of the four living creatures and in the midst of the elders a lamb as though it had been slaughtered, having seven horns and seven eyes, which [eyes] mean the seven spirits of God that have been sent forth into the whole earth.
7  And he went and at once took [it] out of the right hand of the One seated on the throne.
8  And when he took the scroll, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb, having each one a harp and golden bowls that were full of incense, and the [incense] means the prayers of the holy ones.
9  And they sing a new song, saying: “You are worthy to take the scroll and open its seals, because you were slaughtered and with your blood you bought persons for God out of every tribe and tongue and people and nation,
10  and you made them to be a kingdom and priests to our God, and they are to rule as kings over the earth.”
11  And I saw, and I heard a voice of many angels around the throne and the living creatures and the elders, and the number of them was myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands,
12  saying with a loud voice: “The Lamb that was slaughtered is worthy to receive the power and riches and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and blessing.”
13  And every creature that is in heaven and on earth and underneath the earth and on the sea, and all the things in them, I heard saying: “To the One sitting on the throne and to the Lamb be the blessing and the honor and the glory and the might forever and ever.”
14  And the four living creatures went saying: “Amen!” and the elders fell down and worshiped.
revelation 6
6  And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures say with a voice as of thunder: “Come!”
2  And I saw, and, look! a white horse;  and the one seated upon it had a bow;  and a crown was given him, and he went forth conquering and to complete his conquest.
3  And when he opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature say: “Come!”
4  And another came forth, a fiery-colored horse;  and to the one seated upon it there was granted to take peace away from the earth so that they should slaughter one another;  and a great sword was given him.
5  And when he opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature say: “Come!” And I saw, and, look! a black horse;  and the one seated upon it had a pair of scales in his hand.
6  And I heard a voice as if in the midst of the four living creatures say: “A quart of wheat for a denarius, and three quarts of barley for a denarius;  and do not harm the olive oil and the wine.”
7  And when he opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature say: “Come!”
8  And I saw, and, look! a pale horse;  and the one seated upon it had the name Death. And Hades was closely following him. And authority was given them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with a long sword and with food shortage and with deadly plague and by the wild beasts of the earth.
9  And when he opened the fifth seal, I saw underneath the altar the souls of those slaughtered because of the word of God and because of the witness work that they used to have.
10  And they cried with a loud voice, saying: “Until when, Sovereign Lord holy and true, are you refraining from judging and avenging our blood upon those who dwell on the earth?”
11  And a white robe was given to each of them;  and they were told to rest a little while longer, until the number was filled also of their fellow slaves and their brothers who were about to be killed as they also had been.
12  And I saw when he opened the sixth seal, and a great earthquake occurred;  and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the entire moon became as blood,
13  and the stars of heaven fell to the earth, as when a fig tree shaken by a high wind casts its unripe figs.
14  And the heaven departed as a scroll that is being rolled up, and every mountain and [every] island were removed from their places.
15  And the kings of the earth and the top-ranking ones and the military commanders and the rich and the strong ones and every slave and [every] free person hid themselves in the caves and in the rock-masses of the mountains.
16  And they keep saying to the mountains and to the rock-masses: “Fall over us and hide us from the face of the One seated on the throne and from the wrath of the Lamb,
17  because the great day of their wrath has come, and who is able to stand?”
revelation 7
7  After this I saw four angels standing upon the four corners of the earth, holding tight the four winds of the earth, that no wind might blow upon the earth or upon the sea or upon any tree.
2  And I saw another angel ascending from the sunrising, having a seal of [the] living God;  and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels to whom it was granted to harm the earth and the sea,
3  saying: “Do not harm the earth or the sea or the trees, until after we have sealed the slaves of our God in their foreheads.”
4  And I heard the number of those who were sealed, a hundred and forty-four thousand, sealed out of every tribe of the sons of Israel:
5  Out of the tribe of Judah twelve thousand sealed; out of the tribe of Reuben twelve thousand; out of the tribe of Gad twelve thousand; 
6  out of the tribe of Asher twelve thousand; out of the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousand; out of the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand; 
7  out of the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand; out of the tribe of Levi twelve thousand; out of the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand; 
8  out of the tribe of Zebulun twelve thousand; out of the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand; out of the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand sealed.
9  After these things I saw, and, look! a great crowd, which no man was able to number, out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, dressed in white robes;  and there were palm branches in their hands.
10  And they keep on crying with a loud voice, saying: “Salvation [we owe] to our God, who is seated on the throne, and to the Lamb.”
11  And all the angels were standing around the throne and the elders and the four living creatures, and they fell upon their faces before the throne and worshiped God,
12  saying: “Amen! The blessing and the glory and the wisdom and the thanksgiving and the honor and the power and the strength [be] to our God forever and ever. Amen.”
13  And in response one of the elders said to me: “These who are dressed in the white robes, who are they and where did they come from?”
14  So right away I said to him: “My lord, you are the one that knows.” And he said to me: “These are the ones that come out of the great tribulation, and they have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
15  That is why they are before the throne of God;  and they are rendering him sacred service day and night in his temple;  and the One seated on the throne will spread his tent over them.
16  They will hunger no more nor thirst anymore, neither will the sun beat down upon them nor any scorching heat,
17  because the Lamb, who is in the midst of the throne, will shepherd them, and will guide them to fountains of waters of life. And God will wipe out every tear from their eyes.”
revelation 8
8  And when he opened the seventh seal, a silence occurred in heaven for about a half hour.
2  And I saw the seven angels that stand before God, and seven trumpets were given them.
3  And another angel arrived and stood at the altar, having a golden incense vessel;  and a large quantity of incense was given him to offer it with the prayers of all the holy ones upon the golden altar that was before the throne.
4  And the smoke of the incense ascended from the hand of the angel with the prayers of the holy ones before God.
5  But right away the angel took the incense vessel, and he filled it with some of the fire of the altar and hurled it to the earth. And thunders occurred and voices and lightnings and an earthquake.
6  And the seven angels with the seven trumpets prepared to blow them.
7  And the first one blew his trumpet. And there occurred a hail and fire mingled with blood, and it was hurled to the earth;  and a third of the earth was burned up, and a third of the trees was burned up, and all the green vegetation was burned up.
8  And the second angel blew his trumpet. And something like a great mountain burning with fire was hurled into the sea. And a third of the sea became blood; 
9  and a third of the creatures that are in the sea which have souls died, and a third of the boats were wrecked.
10  And the third angel blew his trumpet. And a great star burning as a lamp fell from heaven, and it fell upon a third of the rivers and upon the fountains of waters.
11  And the name of the star is called Wormwood. And a third of the waters turned into wormwood, and many of the men died from the waters, because these had been made bitter.
12  And the fourth angel blew his trumpet. And a third of the sun was smitten and a third of the moon and a third of the stars, in order that a third of them might be darkened and the day might not have illumination for a third of it, and the night likewise.
13  And I saw, and I heard an eagle flying in midheaven say with a loud voice: “Woe, woe, woe to those dwelling on the earth because of the rest of the trumpet blasts of the three angels who are about to blow their trumpets!”
revelation 9
9  And the fifth angel blew his trumpet. And I saw a star that had fallen from heaven to the earth, and the key of the pit of the abyss was given him.
2  And he opened the pit of the abyss, and smoke ascended out of the pit as the smoke of a great furnace, and the sun was darkened, also the air, by the smoke of the pit.
3  And out of the smoke locusts came forth upon the earth;  and authority was given them, the same authority as the scorpions of the earth have.
4  And they were told to harm no vegetation of the earth nor any green thing nor any tree, but only those men who do not have the seal of God on their foreheads.
5  And it was granted the [locusts], not to kill them, but that these should be tormented five months, and the torment upon them was as torment by a scorpion when it strikes a man.
6  And in those days the men will seek death but will by no means find it, and they will desire to die but death keeps fleeing from them.
7  And the likenesses of the locusts resembled horses prepared for battle;  and upon their heads [were] what seemed to be crowns like gold, and their faces [were] as men’s faces,
8  but they had hair as women’s hair. And their teeth were as those of lions; 
9  and they had breastplates like iron breastplates. And the sound of their wings [was] as the sound of chariots of many horses running into battle.
10  Also, they have tails and stings like scorpions;  and in their tails is their authority to hurt the men five months.
11  They have over them a king, the angel of the abyss. In Hebrew his name is Abaddon, but in Greek he has the name Apollyon.
12  The one woe is past. Look! Two more woes are coming after these things.
13  And the sixth angel blew his trumpet. And I heard one voice out of the horns of the golden altar that is before God
14  say to the sixth angel, who had the trumpet: “Untie the four angels that are bound at the great river Euphrates.”
15  And the four angels were untied, who have been prepared for the hour and day and month and year, to kill a third of the men.
16  And the number of the armies of cavalry was two myriads of myriads: I heard the number of them.
17  And this is how I saw the horses in the vision, and those seated on them: they had fire-red and hyacinth-blue and sulphur-yellow breastplates;  and the heads of the horses were as heads of lions, and out of their mouths fire and smoke and sulphur issued forth.
18  By these three plagues a third of the men were killed, from the fire and the smoke and the sulphur which issued forth from their mouths.
19  For the authority of the horses is in their mouths and in their tails;  for their tails are like serpents and have heads, and with these they do harm.
20  But the rest of the men who were not killed by these plagues did not repent of the works of their hands, so that they should not worship the demons and the idols of gold and silver and copper and stone and wood, which can neither see nor hear nor walk; 
21  and they did not repent of their murders nor of their spiritistic practices nor of their fornication nor of their thefts.
revelation 10
10  And I saw another strong angel descending from heaven, arrayed with a cloud, and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as the sun, and his feet were as fiery pillars,
2  and he had in his hand a little scroll opened. And he set his right foot upon the sea, but his left one upon the earth,
3  and he cried out with a loud voice just as when a lion roars. And when he cried out, the seven thunders uttered their own voices.
4  Now when the seven thunders spoke, I was at the point of writing;  but I heard a voice out of heaven say: “Seal up the things the seven thunders spoke, and do not write them down.”
5  And the angel that I saw standing on the sea and on the earth raised his right hand to heaven,
6  and by the One who lives forever and ever, who created the heaven and the things in it and the earth and the things in it and the sea and the things in it, he swore: “There will be no delay any longer; 
7  but in the days of the sounding of the seventh angel, when he is about to blow his trumpet, the sacred secret of God according to the good news which he declared to his own slaves the prophets is indeed brought to a finish.”
8  And the voice that I heard out of heaven is speaking again with me and saying: “Go, take the opened scroll that is in the hand of the angel who is standing on the sea and on the earth.”
9  And I went away to the angel and told him to give me the little scroll. And he said to me: “Take it and eat it up, and it will make your belly bitter, but in your mouth it will be sweet as honey.”
10  And I took the little scroll out of the hand of the angel and ate it up, and in my mouth it was sweet as honey;  but when I had eaten it up, my belly was made bitter.
11  And they say to me: “You must prophesy again with regard to peoples and nations and tongues and many kings.”
revelation 11
11  And a reed like a rod was given me as he said: “Get up and measure the temple [sanctuary] of God and the altar and those worshiping in it.
2  But as for the courtyard that is outside the temple [sanctuary], cast it clear out and do not measure it, because it has been given to the nations, and they will trample the holy city underfoot for forty-two months.
3  And I will cause my two witnesses to prophesy a thousand two hundred and sixty days dressed in sackcloth.”
4  These are [symbolized by] the two olive trees and the two lampstands and are standing before the Lord of the earth.
5  And if anyone wants to harm them, fire issues forth from their mouths and devours their enemies;  and if anyone should want to harm them, in this manner he must be killed.
6  These have the authority to shut up heaven that no rain should fall during the days of their prophesying, and they have authority over the waters to turn them into blood and to strike the earth with every sort of plague as often as they wish.
7  And when they have finished their witnessing, the wild beast that ascends out of the abyss will make war with them and conquer them and kill them.
8  And their corpses will be on the broad way of the great city which is in a spiritual sense called Sodom and Egypt, where their Lord was also impaled.
9  And those of the peoples and tribes and tongues and nations will look at their corpses for three and a half days, and they do not let their corpses be laid in a tomb.
10  And those dwelling on the earth rejoice over them and enjoy themselves, and they will send gifts to one another, because these two prophets tormented those dwelling on the earth.
11  And after the three and a half days spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon those beholding them.
12  And they heard a loud voice out of heaven say to them: “Come on up here.” And they went up into heaven in the cloud, and their enemies beheld them.
13  And in that hour a great earthquake occurred, and a tenth of the city fell;  and seven thousand persons were killed by the earthquake, and the rest became frightened and gave glory to the God of heaven.
14  The second woe is past. Look! The third woe is coming quickly.
15  And the seventh angel blew his trumpet. And loud voices occurred in heaven, saying: “The kingdom of the world did become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ, and he will rule as king forever and ever.”
16  And the twenty-four elders who were seated before God upon their thrones fell upon their faces and worshiped God,
17  saying: “We thank you, Jehovah God, the Almighty, the One who is and who was, because you have taken your great power and begun ruling as king.
18  But the nations became wrathful, and your own wrath came, and the appointed time for the dead to be judged, and to give [their] reward to your slaves the prophets and to the holy ones and to those fearing your name, the small and the great, and to bring to ruin those ruining the earth.”
19  And the temple [sanctuary] of God that is in heaven was opened, and the ark of his covenant was seen in his temple [sanctuary]. And there occurred lightnings and voices and thunders and an earthquake and a great hail.
revelation 12
12  And a great sign was seen in heaven, a woman arrayed with the sun, and the moon was beneath her feet, and on her head was a crown of twelve stars,
2  and she was pregnant. And she cries out in her pains and in her agony to give birth.
3  And another sign was seen in heaven, and, look! a great fiery-colored dragon, with seven heads and ten horns and upon its heads seven diadems; 
4  and its tail drags a third of the stars of heaven, and it hurled them down to the earth. And the dragon kept standing before the woman who was about to give birth, that, when she did give birth, it might devour her child.
5  And she gave birth to a son, a male, who is to shepherd all the nations with an iron rod. And her child was caught away to God and to his throne.
6  And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared by God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and sixty days.
7  And war broke out in heaven: Michael and his angels battled with the dragon, and the dragon and its angels battled
8  but it did not prevail, neither was a place found for them any longer in heaven.
9  So down the great dragon was hurled, the original serpent, the one called Devil and Satan, who is misleading the entire inhabited earth;  he was hurled down to the earth, and his angels were hurled down with him.
10  And I heard a loud voice in heaven say: “Now have come to pass the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God and the authority of his Christ, because the accuser of our brothers has been hurled down, who accuses them day and night before our God!
11  And they conquered him because of the blood of the Lamb and because of the word of their witnessing, and they did not love their souls even in the face of death.
12  On this account be glad, YOU heavens and YOU who reside in them! Woe for the earth and for the sea, because the Devil has come down to YOU, having great anger, knowing he has a short period of time.”
13  Now when the dragon saw that it was hurled down to the earth, it persecuted the woman that gave birth to the male child.
14  But the two wings of the great eagle were given the woman, that she might fly into the wilderness to her place;  there is where she is fed for a time and times and half a time away from the face of the serpent.
15  And the serpent disgorged water like a river from its mouth after the woman, to cause her to be drowned by the river.
16  But the earth came to the woman’s help, and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed up the river that the dragon disgorged from its mouth.
17  And the dragon grew wrathful at the woman, and went off to wage war with the remaining ones of her seed, who observe the commandments of God and have the work of bearing witness to Jesus.
revelation 13
13  And it stood still upon the sand of the sea. And I saw a wild beast ascending out of the sea, with ten horns and seven heads, and upon its horns ten diadems, but upon its heads blasphemous names.
2  Now the wild beast that I saw was like a leopard, but its feet were as those of a bear, and its mouth was as a lion’s mouth. And the dragon gave to [the beast] its power and its throne and great authority.
3  And I saw one of its heads as though slaughtered to death, but its death-stroke got healed, and all the earth followed the wild beast with admiration.
4  And they worshiped the dragon because it gave the authority to the wild beast, and they worshiped the wild beast with the words: “Who is like the wild beast, and who can do battle with it?”
5  And a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies was given it, and authority to act forty-two months was given it.
6  And it opened its mouth in blasphemies against God, to blaspheme his name and his residence, even those residing in heaven.
7  And there was granted it to wage war with the holy ones and conquer them, and authority was given it over every tribe and people and tongue and nation.
8  And all those who dwell on the earth will worship it;  the name of not one of them stands written in the scroll of life of the Lamb who was slaughtered, from the founding of the world.
9  If anyone has an ear, let him hear.
10  If anyone [is meant] for captivity, he goes away into captivity. If anyone will kill with the sword, he must be killed with the sword. Here is where it means the endurance and faith of the holy ones.
11  And I saw another wild beast ascending out of the earth, and it had two horns like a lamb, but it began speaking as a dragon.
12  And it exercises all the authority of the first wild beast in its sight. And it makes the earth and those who dwell in it worship the first wild beast, whose death-stroke got healed.
13  And it performs great signs, so that it should even make fire come down out of heaven to the earth in the sight of mankind.
14  And it misleads those who dwell on the earth, because of the signs that were granted it to perform in the sight of the wild beast, while it tells those who dwell on the earth to make an image to the wild beast that had the sword-stroke and yet revived.
15  And there was granted it to give breath to the image of the wild beast, so that the image of the wild beast should both speak and cause to be killed all those who would not in any way worship the image of the wild beast.
16  And it puts under compulsion all persons, the small and the great, and the rich and the poor, and the free and the slaves, that they should give these a mark in their right hand or upon their forehead,
17  and that nobody might be able to buy or sell except a person having the mark, the name of the wild beast or the number of its name.
18  Here is where wisdom comes in: Let the one that has intelligence calculate the number of the wild beast, for it is a man’s number;  and its number is six hundred and sixty-six.
revelation 14
14  And I saw, and, look! the Lamb standing upon the Mount Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand having his name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads.
2  And I heard a sound out of heaven as the sound of many waters and as the sound of loud thunder;  and the sound that I heard was as of singers who accompany themselves on the harp playing on their harps.
3  And they are singing as if a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the elders;  and no one was able to master that song but the hundred and forty-four thousand, who have been bought from the earth.
4  These are the ones that did not defile themselves with women;  in fact, they are virgins. These are the ones that keep following the Lamb no matter where he goes. These were bought from among mankind as firstfruits to God and to the Lamb,
5  and no falsehood was found in their mouths;  they are without blemish.
6  And I saw another angel flying in midheaven, and he had everlasting good news to declare as glad tidings to those who dwell on the earth, and to every nation and tribe and tongue and people,
7  saying in a loud voice: “FEAR God and give him glory, because the hour of the judgment by him has arrived, and so worship the One who made the heaven and the earth and sea and fountains of waters.”
8  And another, a second angel, followed, saying: “She has fallen! Babylon the Great has fallen, she who made all the nations drink of the wine of the anger of her fornication!”
9  And another angel, a third, followed them, saying in a loud voice: “If anyone worships the wild beast and its image, and receives a mark on his forehead or upon his hand,
10  he will also drink of the wine of the anger of God that is poured out undiluted into the cup of his wrath, and he shall be tormented with fire and sulphur in the sight of the holy angels and in the sight of the Lamb.
11  And the smoke of their torment ascends forever and ever, and day and night they have no rest, those who worship the wild beast and its image, and whoever receives the mark of its name.
12  Here is where it means endurance for the holy ones, those who observe the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus.”
13  And I heard a voice out of heaven say: “Write: Happy are the dead who die in union with [the] Lord from this time onward. Yes, says the spirit, let them rest from their labors, for the things they did go right with them.”
14  And I saw, and, look! a white cloud, and upon the cloud someone seated like a son of man, with a golden crown on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand.
15  And another angel emerged from the temple [sanctuary], crying with a loud voice to the one seated on the cloud: “Put your sickle in and reap, because the hour has come to reap, for the harvest of the earth is thoroughly ripe.”
16  And the one seated on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped.
17  And still another angel emerged from the temple [sanctuary] that is in heaven, he, too, having a sharp sickle.
18  And still another angel emerged from the altar and he had authority over the fire. And he called out with a loud voice to the one that had the sharp sickle, saying: “Put your sharp sickle in and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth, because its grapes have become ripe.”
19  And the angel thrust his sickle into the earth and gathered the vine of the earth, and he hurled it into the great winepress of the anger of God.
20  And the winepress was trodden outside the city, and blood came out of the winepress as high up as the bridles of the horses, for a distance of a thousand six hundred furlongs.
revelation 15
15  And I saw in heaven another sign, great and wonderful, seven angels with seven plagues. These are the last ones, because by means of them the anger of God is brought to a finish.
2  And I saw what seemed to be a glassy sea mingled with fire, and those who come off victorious from the wild beast and from its image and from the number of its name standing by the glassy sea, having harps of God.
3  And they are singing the song of Moses the slave of God and the song of the Lamb, saying: “Great and wonderful are your works, Jehovah God, the Almighty. Righteous and true are your ways, King of eternity.
4  Who will not really fear you, Jehovah, and glorify your name, because you alone are loyal? For all the nations will come and worship before you, because your righteous decrees have been made manifest.”
5  And after these things I saw, and the sanctuary of the tent of the witness was opened in heaven,
6  and the seven angels with the seven plagues emerged from the sanctuary, clothed with clean, bright linen and girded about their breasts with golden girdles.
7  And one of the four living creatures gave the seven angels seven golden bowls that were full of the anger of God, who lives forever and ever.
8  And the sanctuary became filled with smoke because of the glory of God and because of his power, and no one was able to enter into the sanctuary until the seven plagues of the seven angels were finished.
revelation 16
16  And I heard a loud voice out of the sanctuary say to the seven angels: “Go and pour out the seven bowls of the anger of God into the earth.”
2  And the first one went off and poured out his bowl into the earth. And a hurtful and malignant ulcer came to be upon the men that had the mark of the wild beast and that were worshiping its image.
3  And the second one poured out his bowl into the sea. And it became blood as of a dead man, and every living soul died, [yes,] the things in the sea.
4  And the third one poured out his bowl into the rivers and the fountains of the waters. And they became blood.
5  And I heard the angel over the waters say: “You, the One who is and who was, the loyal One, are righteous, because you have rendered these decisions,
6  because they poured out the blood of holy ones and of prophets, and you have given them blood to drink. They deserve it.”
7  And I heard the altar say: “Yes, Jehovah God, the Almighty, true and righteous are your judicial decisions.”
8  And the fourth one poured out his bowl upon the sun;  and to [the sun] it was granted to scorch the men with fire.
9  And the men were scorched with great heat, but they blasphemed the name of God, who has the authority over these plagues, and they did not repent so as to give glory to him.
10  And the fifth one poured out his bowl upon the throne of the wild beast. And its kingdom became darkened, and they began to gnaw their tongues for [their] pain,
11  but they blasphemed the God of heaven for their pains and for their ulcers, and they did not repent of their works.
12  And the sixth one poured out his bowl upon the great river Euphrates, and its water was dried up, that the way might be prepared for the kings from the rising of the sun.
13  And I saw three unclean inspired expressions [that looked] like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon and out of the mouth of the wild beast and out of the mouth of the false prophet.
14  They are, in fact, expressions inspired by demons and perform signs, and they go forth to the kings of the entire inhabited earth, to gather them together to the war of the great day of God the Almighty.
15  “Look! I am coming as a thief. Happy is the one that stays awake and keeps his outer garments, that he may not walk naked and people look upon his shamefulness.”
16  And they gathered them together to the place that is called in Hebrew Har–Magedon.
17  And the seventh one poured out his bowl upon the air. At this a loud voice issued out of the sanctuary from the throne, saying: “It has come to pass!”
18  And lightnings and voices and thunders occurred, and a great earthquake occurred such as had not occurred since men came to be on the earth, so extensive an earthquake, so great.
19  And the great city split into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell;  and Babylon the Great was remembered in the sight of God, to give her the cup of the wine of the anger of his wrath.
20  Also, every island fled, and mountains were not found.
21  And a great hail with every stone about the weight of a talent descended out of heaven upon the men, and the men blasphemed God due to the plague of hail, because the plague of it was unusually great.
revelation 17
17  And one of the seven angels that had the seven bowls came and spoke with me, saying: “Come, I will show you the judgment upon the great harlot who sits on many waters,
2  with whom the kings of the earth committed fornication, whereas those who inhabit the earth were made drunk with the wine of her fornication.”
3  And he carried me away in [the power of the] spirit into a wilderness. And I caught sight of a woman sitting upon a scarlet-colored wild beast that was full of blasphemous names and that had seven heads and ten horns.
4  And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet, and was adorned with gold and precious stone and pearls and had in her hand a golden cup that was full of disgusting things and the unclean things of her fornication.
5  And upon her forehead was written a name, a mystery: “Babylon the Great, the mother of the harlots and of the disgusting things of the earth.”
6  And I saw that the woman was drunk with the blood of the holy ones and with the blood of the witnesses of Jesus. Well, on catching sight of her I wondered with great wonderment.
7  And so the angel said to me: “Why is it you wondered? I will tell you the mystery of the woman and of the wild beast that is carrying her and that has the seven heads and the ten horns:
8  The wild beast that you saw was, but is not, and yet is about to ascend out of the abyss, and it is to go off into destruction. And when they see how the wild beast was, but is not, and yet will be present, those who dwell on the earth will wonder admiringly, but their names have not been written upon the scroll of life from the founding of the world.
9  “Here is where the intelligence that has wisdom comes in: The seven heads mean seven mountains, where the woman sits on top.
10  And there are seven kings: five have fallen, one is, the other has not yet arrived, but when he does arrive he must remain a short while.
11  And the wild beast that was but is not, it is also itself an eighth [king], but springs from the seven, and it goes off into destruction.
12  “And the ten horns that you saw mean ten kings, who have not yet received a kingdom, but they do receive authority as kings one hour with the wild beast.
13  These have one thought, and so they give their power and authority to the wild beast.
14  These will battle with the Lamb, but, because he is Lord of lords and King of kings, the Lamb will conquer them. Also, those called and chosen and faithful with him [will do so].”
15  And he says to me: “The waters that you saw, where the harlot is sitting, mean peoples and crowds and nations and tongues.
16  And the ten horns that you saw, and the wild beast, these will hate the harlot and will make her devastated and naked, and will eat up her fleshy parts and will completely burn her with fire.
17  For God put [it] into their hearts to carry out his thought, even to carry out [their] one thought by giving their kingdom to the wild beast, until the words of God will have been accomplished.
18  And the woman whom you saw means the great city that has a kingdom over the kings of the earth.”
revelation 18
18  After these things I saw another angel descending from heaven, with great authority;  and the earth was lighted up from his glory.
2  And he cried out with a strong voice, saying: “She has fallen! Babylon the Great has fallen, and she has become a dwelling place of demons and a lurking place of every unclean exhalation and a lurking place of every unclean and hated bird!
3  For because of the wine of the anger of her fornication all the nations have fallen [victim], and the kings of the earth committed fornication with her, and the traveling merchants of the earth became rich due to the power of her shameless luxury.”
4  And I heard another voice out of heaven say: “Get out of her, my people, if YOU do not want to share with her in her sins, and if YOU do not want to receive part of her plagues.
5  For her sins have massed together clear up to heaven, and God has called her acts of injustice to mind.
6  Render to her even as she herself rendered, and do to her twice as much, yes, twice the number of the things she did;  in the cup in which she put a mixture put twice as much of the mixture for her.
7  To the extent that she glorified herself and lived in shameless luxury, to that extent give her torment and mourning. For in her heart she keeps saying, ‘I sit a queen, and I am no widow, and I shall never see mourning.’
8  That is why in one day her plagues will come, death and mourning and famine, and she will be completely burned with fire, because Jehovah God, who judged her, is strong.
9  “And the kings of the earth who committed fornication with her and lived in shameless luxury will weep and beat themselves in grief over her, when they look at the smoke from the burning of her,
10  while they stand at a distance because of their fear of her torment and say, ‘Too bad, too bad, you great city, Babylon you strong city, because in one hour your judgment has arrived!’
11  “Also, the traveling merchants of the earth are weeping and mourning over her, because there is no one to buy their full stock anymore,
12  a full stock of gold and silver and precious stone and pearls and fine linen and purple and silk and scarlet;  and everything in scented wood and every sort of ivory object and every sort of object out of most precious wood and of copper and of iron and of marble; 
13  also cinnamon and Indian spice and incense and perfumed oil and frankincense and wine and olive oil and fine flour and wheat and cattle and sheep, and horses and coaches and slaves and human souls.
14  Yes, the fine fruit that your soul desired has departed from you, and all the dainty things and the gorgeous things have perished from you, and never again will people find them.
15  “The traveling merchants of these things, who became rich from her, will stand at a distance because of [their] fear of her torment and will weep and mourn,
16  saying, ‘Too bad, too bad—the great city, clothed with fine linen and purple and scarlet, and richly adorned with gold ornament and precious stone and pearl,
17  because in one hour such great riches have been devastated!’ “And every ship captain and every man that voyages anywhere, and sailors and all those who make a living by the sea, stood at a distance
18  and cried out as they looked at the smoke from the burning of her and said, ‘What city is like the great city?’
19  And they threw dust upon their heads and cried out, weeping and mourning, and said, ‘Too bad, too bad—the great city, in which all those having boats at sea became rich by reason of her costliness, because in one hour she has been devastated!’
20  “Be glad over her, O heaven, also YOU holy ones and YOU apostles and YOU prophets, because God has judicially exacted punishment for YOU from her!”
21  And a strong angel lifted up a stone like a great millstone and hurled it into the sea, saying: “Thus with a swift pitch will Babylon the great city be hurled down, and she will never be found again.
22  And the sound of singers who accompany themselves on the harp and of musicians and of flutists and of trumpeters will never be heard in you again, and no craftsman of any trade will ever be found in you again, and no sound of a millstone will ever be heard in you again,
23  and no light of a lamp will ever shine in you again, and no voice of a bridegroom and of a bride will ever be heard in you again;  because your traveling merchants were the top-ranking men of the earth, for by your spiritistic practice all the nations were misled.
24  Yes, in her was found the blood of prophets and of holy ones and of all those who have been slaughtered on the earth.”
revelation 19
19  After these things I heard what was as a loud voice of a great crowd in heaven. They said: “Praise Jah, YOU people! The salvation and the glory and the power belong to our God,
2  because his judgments are true and righteous. For he has executed judgment upon the great harlot who corrupted the earth with her fornication, and he has avenged the blood of his slaves at her hand.”
3  And right away for the second time they said: “Praise Jah, YOU people! And the smoke from her goes on ascending forever and ever.”
4  And the twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped God seated upon the throne, and said: “Amen! Praise Jah, YOU people!”
5  Also, a voice issued forth from the throne and said: “Be praising our God, all YOU his slaves, who fear him, the small ones and the great.”
6  And I heard what was as a voice of a great crowd and as a sound of many waters and as a sound of heavy thunders. They said: “Praise Jah, YOU people, because Jehovah our God, the Almighty, has begun to rule as king.
7  Let us rejoice and be overjoyed, and let us give him the glory, because the marriage of the Lamb has arrived and his wife has prepared herself.
8  Yes, it has been granted to her to be arrayed in bright, clean, fine linen, for the fine linen stands for the righteous acts of the holy ones.”
9  And he tells me: “Write: Happy are those invited to the evening meal of the Lamb’s marriage.” Also, he tells me: “These are the true sayings of God.”
10  At that I fell down before his feet to worship him. But he tells me: “Be careful! Do not do that! All I am is a fellow slave of you and of your brothers who have the work of witnessing to Jesus. Worship God;  for the bearing witness to Jesus is what inspires prophesying.”
11  And I saw the heaven opened, and, look! a white horse. And the one seated upon it is called Faithful and True, and he judges and carries on war in righteousness.
12  His eyes are a fiery flame, and upon his head are many diadems. He has a name written that no one knows but he himself,
13  and he is arrayed with an outer garment sprinkled with blood, and the name he is called is The Word of God.
14  Also, the armies that were in heaven were following him on white horses, and they were clothed in white, clean, fine linen.
15  And out of his mouth there protrudes a sharp long sword, that he may strike the nations with it, and he will shepherd them with a rod of iron. He treads too the winepress of the anger of the wrath of God the Almighty.
16  And upon his outer garment, even upon his thigh, he has a name written, King of kings and Lord of lords.
17  I saw also an angel standing in the sun, and he cried out with a loud voice and said to all the birds that fly in midheaven: “Come here, be gathered together to the great evening meal of God,
18  that YOU may eat the fleshy parts of kings and the fleshy parts of military commanders and the fleshy parts of strong men and the fleshy parts of horses and of those seated upon them, and the fleshy parts of all, of freemen as well as of slaves and of small ones and great.”
19  And I saw the wild beast and the kings of the earth and their armies gathered together to wage the war with the one seated on the horse and with his army.
20  And the wild beast was caught, and along with it the false prophet that performed in front of it the signs with which he misled those who received the mark of the wild beast and those who render worship to its image. While still alive, they both were hurled into the fiery lake that burns with sulphur.
21  But the rest were killed off with the long sword of the one seated on the horse, which [sword] proceeded out of his mouth. And all the birds were filled from the fleshy parts of them.
revelation 20
20  And I saw an angel coming down out of heaven with the key of the abyss and a great chain in his hand.
2  And he seized the dragon, the original serpent, who is the Devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years.
3  And he hurled him into the abyss and shut [it] and sealed [it] over him, that he might not mislead the nations anymore until the thousand years were ended. After these things he must be let loose for a little while.
4  And I saw thrones, and there were those who sat down on them, and power of judging was given them. Yes, I saw the souls of those executed with the ax for the witness they bore to Jesus and for speaking about God, and those who had worshiped neither the wild beast nor its image and who had not received the mark upon their forehead and upon their hand. And they came to life and ruled as kings with the Christ for a thousand years.
5  (The rest of the dead did not come to life until the thousand years were ended.) This is the first resurrection.
6  Happy and holy is anyone having part in the first resurrection;  over these the second death has no authority, but they will be priests of God and of the Christ, and will rule as kings with him for the thousand years.
7  Now as soon as the thousand years have been ended, Satan will be let loose out of his prison,
8  and he will go out to mislead those nations in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together for the war. The number of these is as the sand of the sea.
9  And they advanced over the breadth of the earth and encircled the camp of the holy ones and the beloved city. But fire came down out of heaven and devoured them.
10  And the Devil who was misleading them was hurled into the lake of fire and sulphur, where both the wild beast and the false prophet [already were];  and they will be tormented day and night forever and ever.
11  And I saw a great white throne and the one seated on it. From before him the earth and the heaven fled away, and no place was found for them.
12  And I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne, and scrolls were opened. But another scroll was opened;  it is the scroll of life. And the dead were judged out of those things written in the scrolls according to their deeds.
13  And the sea gave up those dead in it, and death and Hades gave up those dead in them, and they were judged individually according to their deeds.
14  And death and Hades were hurled into the lake of fire. This means the second death, the lake of fire.
15  Furthermore, whoever was not found written in the book of life was hurled into the lake of fire.
revelation 21
21  And I saw a new heaven and a new earth;  for the former heaven and the former earth had passed away, and the sea is no more.
2  I saw also the holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God and prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.
3  With that I heard a loud voice from the throne say: “Look! The tent of God is with mankind, and he will reside with them, and they will be his peoples. And God himself will be with them.
4  And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”
5  And the One seated on the throne said: “Look! I am making all things new.” Also, he says: “Write, because these words are faithful and true.”
6  And he said to me: “They have come to pass! I am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. To anyone thirsting I will give from the fountain of the water of life free.
7  Anyone conquering will inherit these things, and I shall be his God and he will be my son.
8  But as for the cowards and those without faith and those who are disgusting in their filth and murderers and fornicators and those practicing spiritism and idolaters and all the liars, their portion will be in the lake that burns with fire and sulphur. This means the second death.”
9  And there came one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls which were full of the seven last plagues, and he spoke with me and said: “Come here, I will show you the bride, the Lamb’s wife.”
10  So he carried me away in [the power of the] spirit to a great and lofty mountain, and he showed me the holy city Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God
11  and having the glory of God. Its radiance was like a most precious stone, as a jasper stone shining crystal-clear.
12  It had a great and lofty wall and had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names were inscribed which are those of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel.
13  On the east were three gates, and on the north three gates, and on the south three gates, and on the west three gates.
14  The wall of the city also had twelve foundation stones, and on them the twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
15  Now the one who was speaking with me was holding as a measure a golden reed, that he might measure the city and its gates and its wall.
16  And the city lies foursquare, and its length is as great as its breadth. And he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs;  its length and breadth and height are equal.
17  Also, he measured its wall, one hundred and forty-four cubits, according to a man’s measure, at the same time an angel’s.
18  Now the structure of its wall was jasper, and the city was pure gold like clear glass.
19  The foundations of the city’s wall were adorned with every sort of precious stone: the first foundation was jasper, the second sapphire, the third chalcedony, the fourth emerald,
20  the fifth sardonyx, the sixth sardius, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh hyacinth, the twelfth amethyst.
21  Also, the twelve gates were twelve pearls;  each one of the gates was made of one pearl. And the broad way of the city was pure gold, as transparent glass.
22  And I did not see a temple in it, for Jehovah God the Almighty is its temple, also the Lamb [is].
23  And the city has no need of the sun nor of the moon to shine upon it, for the glory of God lighted it up, and its lamp was the Lamb.
24  And the nations will walk by means of its light, and the kings of the earth will bring their glory into it.
25  And its gates will not be closed at all by day, for night will not exist there.
26  And they will bring the glory and the honor of the nations into it.
27  But anything not sacred and anyone that carries on a disgusting thing and a lie will in no way enter into it;  only those written in the Lamb’s scroll of life [will].
revelation 22
22  And he showed me a river of water of life, clear as crystal, flowing out from the throne of God and of the Lamb
2  down the middle of its broad way. And on this side of the river and on that side [there were] trees of life producing twelve crops of fruit, yielding their fruits each month. And the leaves of the trees [were] for the curing of the nations.
3  And no more will there be any curse. But the throne of God and of the Lamb will be in [the city], and his slaves will render him sacred service; 
4  and they will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads.
5  Also, night will be no more, and they have no need of lamplight nor [do they have] sunlight, because Jehovah God will shed light upon them, and they will rule as kings forever and ever.
6  And he said to me: “These words are faithful and true;  yes, Jehovah the God of the inspired expressions of the prophets sent his angel forth to show his slaves the things that must shortly take place.
7  And, look! I am coming quickly. Happy is anyone observing the words of the prophecy of this scroll.”
8  Well, I John was the one hearing and seeing these things. And when I had heard and seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel that had been showing me these things.
9  But he tells me: “Be careful! Do not do that! All I am is a fellow slave of you and of your brothers who are prophets and of those who are observing the words of this scroll. Worship God.”
10  He also tells me: “Do not seal up the words of the prophecy of this scroll, for the appointed time is near.
11  He that is doing unrighteousness, let him do unrighteousness still;  and let the filthy one be made filthy still;  but let the righteous one do righteousness still, and let the holy one be made holy still.
12  “‘Look! I am coming quickly, and the reward I give is with me, to render to each one as his work is.
13  I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end.
14  Happy are those who wash their robes, that the authority [to go] to the trees of life may be theirs and that they may gain entrance into the city by its gates.
15  Outside are the dogs and those who practice spiritism and the fornicators and the murderers and the idolaters and everyone liking and carrying on a lie.’
16  “‘I, Jesus, sent my angel to bear witness to YOU people of these things for the congregations. I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright morning star.’”
17  And the spirit and the bride keep on saying: “Come!” And let anyone hearing say: “Come!” And let anyone thirsting come;  let anyone that wishes take life’s water free.
18  “I am bearing witness to everyone that hears the words of the prophecy of this scroll: If anyone makes an addition to these things, God will add to him the plagues that are written in this scroll; 
19  and if anyone takes anything away from the words of the scroll of this prophecy, God will take his portion away from the trees of life and out of the holy city, things which are written about in this scroll.
20  “He that bears witness of these things says, ‘Yes;  I am coming quickly.’” “Amen! Come, Lord Jesus.”
21  [May] the undeserved kindness of the Lord Jesus Christ [be] with the holy ones.
